Skip to main content
Search

 UPLOADEnglish Buddy ENGLISH BUDDY
 
 
 
 
 
Upload files
My uploads
My loans
My favorites
My lists
My collections
My web archives
Account settings
Get help
Log out
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "The Roman antiquities of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, with an English translation by Earnest Cary, Ph. D., on the basis of the version of Edward Spelman"
See other formats


tl νει 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2008 with funding from 
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/romanantiquitiesO1 dionuoft 










aay 4 


Ay, ἀκ ty oh eA, 
24 ᾿ d ‘4 ¥ τ lon Ὁ" 


μὶ 


ΠΣ rat 


ray ‘ , 
J "te f 


ΣΝ 7 
Ay SH ὦ. 

͵ ¥ ; ἢ ῳ ᾿ Ἵ nwt if | 
i 

) 

' 
fe 

δὴ 
a 

ia 

ἊΝ 











ἫΝ i A " 


sana es ᾿ : 





THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


FOUNDED BY JAMES LOEB, LL.D. 


EDITED BY 


+T,. E. PAGE, ©.8., LITT.D. 
ΤΕ. CAPPS, PH.D., LL.D. ΤΥ. H. Ὁ. ROUSE, ταῦτ... 
L. A. POST, L.u.D, E. H. WARMINGTON, 
M.A., F.R.HIST.SOC. 


THE ROMAN ANTIQUITIES 


OF 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Y 
a 





= = ’ 
7 ᾿ 4 
s tees" 
ων 6 
_ 
> ᾿ 
4 
Ἕ 
. ᾿ 
- 
"" ᾿ 
Φ 
Π 
¢ 


THE ROMAN ANTIQUITIES 


OF 
DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
EARNEST CARY, Pu Ὁ. 
ON THE BASIS OF THE VERSION OF 
EDWARD SPELMAN 


IN SEVEN VOLUMES 


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 


HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 


LONDON 


WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD 


MCMLX 





First PRINTED . 1937 
REPRINTED . 1948, 1960 






JUN 5 1967 


&, 
oz 9 
b, τ᾿ 





Printed in Great Britain by The University Press, Aberdeen 


INTRODUCTION . 


Book lI. . 
Boox II. 


INDEX . 


CONTENTS 


eona7 


i 


CPV 095 





; 3} ὰ κοιτοῦ ΠῚ 
ἴω 


7 a 


4 
* 


> 
(a 


INTRODUCTION 
Lire or Dionysius 


Tue few facts known about the life of Dionysius 
are virtually all given us by the author himself. At 
the close of the preface to the Roman Antiquities 
(chap. 8) he announces himself as Dionysius, the 
son of Alexander, and a native of Halicarnassus. 
He also informs us (chap. 7) that he had come to 
Italy at the ttme when Augustus Caesar put an end 
to the civil war in the middle of the 187th Olympiad 
(late in 30 B.c. or in 29), and that he had spent the 
following twenty-two years in acquainting himself 
with the language and the literature of the Romans, 
in gathering his materials, and in writing his History. 
The preface is dated (chap. 3) in the consulship of 
Nero and Piso (7 8.c.), and the first part, at least, of 
the work must have been published at that time. 
It is generally assumed that the entire Histo 

appeared then; but in Book VII. (70, 2) Dionysius 
refers to Book I. as having been already published. 
This leaves it an open question in how mapy instal- 
ments and at what intervals he issued the work. 
We do not know the exact date of his birth; but 
two casual statements in the History enable us to 
fix it within certain limits. He cites the disastrous 


vii 


INTRODUCTION 


campaign of Crassus against the Parthians as an 
event of his own lifetime (11. 6, 4) ; and in describing 
the erection of the original Capitol he states that the 
new edifice, ‘ built in the days of our fathers,’ stood 
on the same foundations as the old (iv. 61,4). The 
first of these passages shows that he was born at 
Jeast as early as 53, and perhaps as early as 54 or 
55, since the reference may very well be to the whole 
Parthian expedition. The second allusion is more 
indefinite. The new Capitol, begun by Sulla shortly 
after the burning of the old structure in 83, was 
formally dedicated by Catulus in 69; nevertheless, 
as late as the beginning of 62 Caesar, in bringing 
charges of embezzlement against Catulus, claimed 
that many parts of the temple were still but half- 
finished and accordingly wished to have Pompey 
entrusted with the completion of the work... We 
do not know how much justification there was for 
Caesar’s action, though it is evident that it was 
primarily a political move; in any case, he was 
unsuccessful, and Catulus’ name remained on the 
pediment of the temple. Whether Dionysius knew 
of Caesar’s charges or attached any importance to 
them we can only conjecture. Egger,” taking these 
charges seriously, argued that Dionysius must have 
been born after 63; yet it is just as natural to 
believe that the historian dated the temple by the 
official dedication. The two passages, then, give as 
extreme limits for the date of Dionysius’ birth 69 
and 53, with some possibility of the narrower limits 
of 62 and 55. Modern scholars have generally 


1 Dio Cassius, xxxvii. 44; cf. xliii. 14, 6. 
2 Max. Egger, Denys d’ Halicarnasse, p. 3. 


eee 


INTRODUCTION 


assumed a date between 60 and 55, from the feeling 
that Dionysius must have been a fairly young man 
when he came to Rome and undertook to master a 
new language and literature. The only other refer- 
ence in an ancient author to the time when Dionysius 
lived is even more indefinite than those just quoted. 
Strabo (ca. 63 B.c.—ca. 21 A.D.), in speaking of 
Halicarnassus, names, as authors who claimed that 
city as their birthplace, Herodotus, Heracleitus the 
poet, and, ‘in our time,’ Dionysius the historian 
(xiv. 2, 16). 

Halicarnassus had declined greatly in importance 
after the time of Maussolus, and finally suffered 
grievously at the hands of the pirates not far from 
the time when Dionysius was born. It was given 
a new lease of life by Quintus Cicero while he was 
serving as governor of Asia (61-58), if we may believe 
the enthusiastic tribute paid him by his brother. 
Such was the city in which Dionysius apparently 
spent his youth and early manhood. Whether he 
composed any of his rhetorical treatises while still 
residing there is uncertain; but it is generally held 
that they were all written at Rome. 

In Rome Dionysius was a teacher of rhetoric, 
probably giving private lessons; in one of his 
treatises addressed to a pupil he refers to ‘ our 
daily exercises.’ From these shorter works. which 
took the form of letters addressed to friends, patrons 


1 Cicero, ad Quint. fratr.i. 1, 8: urbes complures dirutas 
ac paene desertas, in quibus unam Ioniae nobilissimam, 
alteram Cariae, Samum et Halicarnassum, per te esse 
recrealas. 

2 On the Arrangement of Words, chap. 20. 


INTROPUCTION 


or pupils, we learn the names of a number of his 
friends and associates; but unfortunately they are, 
with one or two exceptions, otherwise unknown to 
us. Aelius Tubero may have been the historian 
and jurist who was consul in 1] B.c., the same 
historian who is praised in the Antiquities (i. 80, 1). 
Melitius Rufus, a pupil, and his father, whom 
Dionysius calls a most valued friend, were evidently 
Romans. Cn. Pompeius Geminus may well have 
been a Greek, in spite of his name; Ammaeus also 
was probably a Greek, and so almost certainly were 
Demetrius and Zeno. Caecilius of Calacte, who is 
styled a dear friend, was a rhetorician and historian 
of whom a good dealis known In the introduction 
to the History (chap. 7) Dionysius states that he 
gained some of his information orally from most 
learned men (Romans by implication) with whom he 
came in contact. It would be interesting indeed to 
know the names of some of these men and how 
intimately he associated with them; but, with the 
possible exception of Aelius Tubero, he nowhere 
names a contemporary Roman author, although he 
pays tribute to the many excellent works that were 
being produced in his day,—histories, speeches and 
philosophical treatises,—by both Romans and 
Greeks.! From the circumstance that he gives 
particular credit to the ruling classes of Rome for 
the recent purification of literary taste, Roberts 
suggests that he may have been ἡ influenced more 
directly . . . by the Roman men of affairs with 
whom (or with whose sons) his vocation brought him 


On the Ancient Orators, chap. 3. 


INTRODUCTION 


into contact than by any Roman man of letters.”! 
One avowed purpose in writing his History was to 
make a grateful return to Rome for the education 
and other advantages he had enjoyed there : 5 and 
this certainly suggests that he felt he had been 
made welcome in Rome. 

We have no information regarding the date of 
his death. If he was the author of the summary 
of his History in five books which Photius (Cod. 84) 
attributes to him, he doubtless wrote this after the 
publication of the large work, and so must have 
lived for some little time at least after 7B.c. There 
are several passages in his shorter works in which 
he promises to discuss this or that topic ‘if I have 
the time,’ or ‘if it is possible, or ‘if Heaven 
keeps us safe and sound.’ These have sometimes 
been taken to indicate that he was already an old 
man or in poor health; but it is by no means 
necessary to put such a construction upon his words. 


THE RomMAN ANTIQUITIES 


The work which Dionysius undoubtedly regarded 
as his masterpiece and the practical embodiment 
of his theories regarding historical writing was the 
Roman Antiquities.? It treated the history of Rome 
from the earliest legendary times down to the 


1W. Rhys Roberts, Dionysius of Halicarnassus: The 
Three Literary Letters, p. 35. 

2 Antiq. i. 6, 5. 

3 This is the traditional English rendering of the Greek 
title; if we were translating it to-day for the first time 
we should probably render it Harly History (or Ancient 
Lore) of Rome. 


xi 


INTRODUCTION 


beginning of the First Punic War, the point at which 
Polybius’ history began. The work was in twenty 
books, of which the first ten are preserved, together 
with the greater part of the eleventh. Of the re- 
maining books we have fragments amounting all 
told to a little more than the average length of one 
of the earlier books. Most of these fragments come 
from the great collection of historical extracts 
made at the direction of the emperor Constantine 
Porphyrogennetus in the tenth century. 

In his preface Dionysius lays down two principles 
~ as fundamental for historians, first, that thev should 
choose subjects noble and lofty and of great utility 
to their readers, and, second, that they should use 
the greatest care and discrimination in gathering 
their materials. He then proceeds to justify his 
own choice of subject and to describe the careful 
preparation he had made for his task. In two chap- 
ters. obviously imitated from Polybius’ introduc- 
tion. he gives a brief survey of the empires of the 
past, from the Assyrian to the Macedonian, with a 
glance at the Greek hegemonies, and points out 
how greatly Rome had surpassed them all, both in 
the extent of her dominion and in the length of 
time it had already endured. He then undertakes 
to answer the anticipated criticism of those who 
might censure him for choosing the humble begin- 
nings of Rome as his particular theme when there 
were so many glorious periods in her later history 


1 Photius, Cod. 83. Stephanus οἱ Byzantium cited 
numerous Italian place-names from the Antiquities. often 
giving the number of the book; the last book he names 
is the nineteenth. 


xD 


INTRODUCTION 


that would furnish excellent subjects. He declares 
that the Greeks for the most part were ignorant of 
Rome’s early history, having been misled by baseless 
reports that attributed the founding of the city to 
some homeless wanderers, at once barbarians and 
slaves, and hence were inclined to rail at Fortune 
for unfairly bestowing the heritage of the Greeks 
upon the basest of barbarians. He promises to 
correct these erroneous impressions and to prove 
that Rome’s founders were in reality Greeks, and 
Greeks from no mean tribes; he will also show that 
Rome from the very beginning produced countless 
instances of men as pious, just and brave as any 
other city ever did, and that it was due to these 
early leaders and to the customs and institutions 
handed down by them that their descendants 
advanced to so great power. Thus he hopes to 
reconcile his Greek readers to their subjection to 
Rome. He points out that there had been no 
accurate history of Rome written by Greeks, but 
only summary accounts, and even the Romans who 
had written histories of their country in Greek had 
passed lightly over events occurring before their 
own days. He feels, therefore, that in this earlier 
period of Rome’s history he has found a noble 
theme virtually untouched as yet. By treating 
this period adequately he will confer immortal 
glory upon those worthy men of early Rome and 
encourage their descendants to emulate them in 
leading honourable and useful lives; at the same 
time he will have the opportunity of showing his 
goodwill toward all good men who delight in the 
contemplation of great and noble deeds, and also of 


ΧΗΣ 


INTRODUCTION 


making a grateful return to Rome for the culturai 
advantages and other blessings that he had enjoyed 
while residing there. He declares, however, that it 
is not for the sake of flattering the Romans that he 
has turned his attention to this subject, but out of 
regard for truth and justice, the proper objects of 
every history. He then describes his preparation 
for his task,—the twenty-two years he had spent in 
familiarizing himself with the language and litera- 
ture of the Romans, the oral information he had 
received from the most learned men, and the ap- 
proved Roman histories that he had read. Finally, 
he announces the period of Roman history to be 
covered in his work! and the topics to be treated. 
He will relate the wars waged by Rome with other 
peoples and the seditions at home, her various forms 
of government, the best of her customs and the most 
important of her laws; in short, he will picture the 
whole life of the ancient city. As regards the form 
of his History, it will not be like the works of those 
who write of wars alone or treat solely of political 
constitutions, nor will it be monotonous and tire- 
some like the annalistic histories of Athens; but it 
will be a combination of every style, so as to appeal 


1He does not explicitly state why he terminated his 
‘History with the beginning of the First Punic War, but 
the reasons are not far to seek. With this war Rome 
emerged from the relative obscurity of her own peninsula 
and entered upon her struggle for the supremacy of the 
Mediterranean. There were already histories in Greek, 
notably that of Polybius, recounting her achievements 
from this time onward; but for the period preceding the 
Punic Wars Dionysius could feel that he was virtually a 
pioneer in his undertaking. 


χὶν 


INTRODUCTION 


alike to statesmen and to philosophers as well as to 
those who desire mere undisturbed entertainment in 
their reading of history. 

More than once in the course of his History 
(v. 56, xi. 1; ef. vii. 66) Dionysius interrupts his 
narrative to insist on the importance of acquainting 
the reader not only with the mere outcome of events, 
but also with the causes, remote as well as proximate, 
that led up to them, the circumstances in which the 
events occurred and the motives of the chief par- 
ticipants,—in fact, the whole background of the 
action. Such information, he says, is of the utmost 
importance to statesmen, in order that they may 
have precedents for the various situations that may 
confront them and may thus be able to persuade 
their fellow-citizens when they can adduce numerous 
examples from the past to show the advantage or 
the harm of a given course of action. Dionysius 
here shows an understanding of the true function of 
history, as he does also, in a measure, in his various 
protestations of devotion to the truth, though he 
nowhere sets up such a strict standard of absolute 
impartiality as did Polybius (i. 14, 4). 

Unfortunately, in spite of these high ideals which 
Dionysius tried to keep before him, his Antiquities 
is an outstanding example of the mischievous results 
of that unnatural alliance between rhetoric and 
history which was the vogue after the time of 
Thucydides. The rhetoricians regarded a history as 
a work of art whose primary purpose was to give 
pleasure. Events in themselves seem to have been 
considered as of less importance than the manner in 
which they were presented. Hence various liberties 


ΧΥ 


INTRODUCTION 


could be taken with the facts in order to produce a 
more telling effect; and as long as this was done 
not out of fear or favour, but simply from the 
desire to make the account more effective, the 
writer was not conscious of violating the truth. 
Dionysius doubtless thought that he was living up 
to his high ideals; but he was first and foremost 
a rhetorician and could see history only through a 
rhetorician’s eyes. The desire to please is every- 
where in evidence; there is a constant straining 
after rhetorical and dramatic effects. 

In conformity with the rhetorical tradition, he 
interlarded his narrative with speeches which he 
managed to insert on every possible occasion from 
the third book onward. One technical purpose 
which they were intended to serve—to give variety 
to the narrative—is clear from the very circumstance 
that there are scarcely any speeches at all in Books 
I. and II., which have a sufficiently diversified 
narrative to require no further efforts at variety, 
whereas from Book III. onward the speeches occupy 
very nearly one-third of the total text. Dionysius 
himself occasionally felt the need of some justifica- 
tion of his insertion of so many speeches and argued 
that, inasmuch as the crisis under consideration 
was settled by discussion, it was therefore important 
for the reader to know the arguments that were 
advanced on both sides (vii. 66; xi. 1). Yet he 
had no adequate conception of the talents required 
for carrying out this ambitious programme success- 
fully. Possessing neither the historical sense nor 
psychological insight, nor even any special gift of 
imagination, he undertook to compose speeches for 


Xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


any and all occasions by the simple process of 
following certain stereotyped rhetorical rules. The 
main argument of many of his speeches he doubtless 
found already expressed in his sources, either in 
some detail or in the form of a brief résumé, while in 
other cases there was probably a mere form of state- 
ment that implied a speech at that point , numerous 
instances of each of these methods can be seen in 
Livy (who was not one of his sources) on the 
occasions where Dionysius inserts a speech. But it 
was little more than the main argument at best 
that he took over from his sources in most of the 
speeches of any length. The speeches were the 
part of a history in which the author was expected 
to give the freest reign to his rhetorical talents ; 
and that Dionysius did not fail to make full use of 
this opportunity is evident from the many imitations 
of the classical Attic prose writers that are found 
in his speeches. One of his fundamental principles 
for the acquiring of a good style was the imitating 
of classical models, and in the speeches of the 
Antiquities we see how it was to be done. Not only 
do we find single phrases and sentences from 
Demosthenes, Thucydides and Xenophon para- 
phrased and amplified, but even the tenor of entire 
passages in those authors is imitated.’ It is not 
at all surprising, therefore, that these speeches fail 
aimost completely to perform their true function of 


1His imitations of the authors named have been 
analysed by Flierle, Ueber Nachahmungen des Demosthenes, 
Thucydides und Xenophon in den Reden der Rim. Archa- 
ologie des Dionysius von Halicarnass, Leipzig, 1890. The 
investigation should be continued to include Lysias and 
other orators. 


XV 


INTRODUCTION 


revealing the character and the motives of the 
different speakers. Nor are they redeemed by any 
profound thoughts, unless in the imitated passages, 
or by any original sentiments; for the most part 
they are little more than a succession of cheap 
platitudes and rhetorical commonplaces. Indeed, 
we might almost believe at times that we were 
reading the declamations of Dionysius’ own pupils. 

It has generally been suspected that Dionysius 
invented a good many of his speeches outright, 
inserting them at points where there was no indica- 
tion of any speech in his sources. One fairly clear 
instance of the sort is found in his account of 
Coriolanus (viii. 5-8). After giving much the same 
account as Livy does of the trick played on the 
Romans by Attius Tullus at Coriolanus’ suggestion 
in order to provoke them into giving the Volscians 
a just cause for going to war, Dionysius then re- 
presents Coriolanus as summoned by the Volscian 
leaders to advise them how best to prosecute the 
war. Coriolanus, in a speech clearly modelled upon 
the one addressed to the Spartans by the exiled 
Alcibiades (Thuc. vi. 89 ff.), says much by way of 
self-justification, and finally offers a fresh plan for 
providing the Volscians with a just ground for 
war. ‘There is no valid excuse for this second plan, 
the first one having already proved successful ; 
Dionysius clearly wished to offer a parallel in his 
History to the famous episode in Thucydides. 
It is quite probable that several other speeches in 
this long account of Coriolanus also originated with 
Dionysius. Yet it must be remembered that he 
drew largely on the late annalists, some of whose 


xvVill 


INTRODUCTION 


histories were very voluminous ; and he may have 
found at least hints of speeches more frequently 
than has generally been supposed. 

Quite in keeping with the tiresome speeches of 
the Antiquities are the long, circumstantial accounts 
of such events as Dionysius chose to emphasize in 
his narrative, and the cumulation of pathetic or 
gruesome details in tragic situations. His account 
of the combat between the Horatii and the Curiatii, 
followed by Horatius’ slaying of his sister, occupies 
ten chapters (iii. 13-22) as against but three in Livy 
(i. 24-26) ; and there is even a greater disproportion 
in the length of their accounts of the events lead- 
ing up to the combat (Dionys. iii. 2-12, Livy i. 
22 f.) due in part to several long speeches in Dio- 
nysius. The outstanding instance of prolixity in 
the Antiquities is the account of Coriolanus. The 
events leading up to his exile (including 15 speeches) 
require 48 chapters (vii. 20-67), whereas Livy 
relates them in one-half of a single chapter (ii. 34, 
7-12); the remaining events to the end of his life 
are told by Dionysius in 62 chapters (viii. 1-62), 
and by Livy in 6 (1. 35-40). Almost everywhere 
in the extant portions of Dionysius his account is 
longer than that of Livy; but this relative fullness 
of detail was not maintained to the end of the 
History. To the struggle between the orders and 
to the Samnite wars he devoted less than four books 
(part of xiv. and xy.-xvii), where Livy has more 
than six (vi.-xi. and part of xii.). In other words, 
for events nearer his own day, for which the tradi- 
tions should have been fuller and more reliable, he 
contented himself with a briefer narrative than for 


Xik 


INTRODUCTION 


the earlier periods, which for most historians had 
been full of doubt and uncertainty, thereby exactly 
reversing the logical procedure of Livy. An excep- 
tion is seen in his detailed account of the war with 
Pyrrhus, a war which aroused his special interest 
for more reasons than one. Nowhere is his fondness 
for minute detail more out of place than in his 
accounts of tragic events, such as the encounter of 
the triumphant Horatius with his sister, Tullia’s 
behaviour when she forces the driver of her car to 
continue on his way over the dead body of her 
father, the grief of Lucretius when his daughter 
slays herself, Verginius’ slaying of his own daughter, 
and Veturia’s visit to the camp of her son Coriolanus. 
By his constant effort to make us realize the full 
pathos or horror of the scene he defeats his own 
purpose. The dignified restraint shown by Livy in 
relating these same events is far more impressive. 
Dionysius perhaps felt that he was making a 
distinct contribution toward the solidarity of the 
Graeco-Roman world when he undertook to prove, 
as his principal thesis, the Greek origin of Rome’s 
founders. Not only did he trace the Aborigines 
back through the Oenotrians to Arcadia, but he 
even showed that the ancestors of the Trojans had 
come originally from that same district of Greece ; 
other Greek elements represented in the population 
of early Rome were the Pelasgians, naturally of 
Greek origin, Evander and his company from 
Arcadia, and some Peloponnesian soldiers in the 
following of Hercules, who had remained behind in 
Italy when that hero passed through the peninsula 
on his return from Spain to Argos. None of the 


xx 


INTRODUCTION 


various details of this theory was original with 
Dionysius, for he cites his authorities at every step ; 
but he may have been the first to combine these 
separate strands of tradition into a single, compre- 
hensive argument. The entire first book is devoted 
to the proving of this thesis; and the argument is 
further strengthened at the end of Book VII. by a 
detailed comparison of the ceremonies at the Ludi 
Romani with early Greek religious observances. 
As we saw from his introduction, he hoped by this 
demonstration to reconcile his fellow Greeks to 
Rome’s supremacy ; at the same time, he obviousl 

understood the Romans of his day well enough to 
realize that, far from regarding Rome’s glory as 
thereby diminished in any way, they would feel 
flattered by the thought of such a connexion with 
the heroic age of Greece. Incidentally, the proving 
of his thesis afforded him an excellent opportunity 
for dealing with the legendary period and thus 
giving greater variety to his work. But the accept- 
ance of this theory was bound to give him an 
inverted view of the course of Roman history. 
Instead of recognizing the gradual evolution of 
the people and their institutions from very rude 
beginnings, he sees an advanced stage of civilization 
existing from the very first; and Rome’s kings and 
later leaders are in such close contact with the 
Greek world that they borrow thence most of the 
new institutions that they establish from time to 
time. Thus he assumes that the celeres, the senate, 
the two consuls with joint powers, and the custom 
whereby the members of each curia dined together 
on holy days, were all based on Spartan models ; 


XxX) 


INTRODUCTION 


that the division of the citizens into patricians and 
plebeians followed a similar division at Athens; 
that Servius Tullius organized a Latin League on 
the analogy of the Amphictyonic League of Greece, 
and that even the dictatorship was suggested by 
the practice followed in various Greek cities of 
appointing an aisymnetes to deal with a particular 
emergency. Dionysius probably found most, if not 
all, of these institutions thus explained in his sources ; 
in about half of the instances he qualifies his 
statement by the words ‘ in my opinion,’ but this 
does not seem a sufficient criterion for deciding the 
authorship of these views. 

Dionysius is so ready to praise Rome’s ancient 
heroes and institutions on every occasion, with never 
a word of disapprobation, that his impartiality may 
well be questioned. On a number of occasions he 
praises the piety and other virtues of the early 
Romans, which secured for them the special favour 
of Heaven; once (xx. 6) he styles them the most 
holy and just of Greeks. A number of their laws 
and practices, especially some of those said to have 
been instituted by Romulus, are declared to be 
superior to those in vogue among the Greeks. Thus, 
Romulus’ policy of colonizing captured cities and 
sometimes even granting them the franchise is 
contrasted with the ruthless practices of the leading 
Greek states and their narrow-minded policy of 
withholding the rights of citizenship from outsiders 
(ii. 16 f., xiv. 6); and his laws regarding marriage 
and the patria potestas are described as better 
than the corresponding Greek practices (ii. 24-27). 
Romulus is praised also for rejecting such of the 


μὰ 


INTRODUCTION 


myths as attributed any unseemly conduct to the 
gods and all grosser forms of religious worship 
(ii. 18 f.). Indeed, our historian even approves of 
the Roman censorship, the inquisitorial powers of 
which were not limited, as in Athens and Sparta, 
to the public behaviour of the citizens, but extended 
even inside the walls of private homes (xx. 13). 
But it is not the Greeks alone who are contrasted 
unfavourably with the old Romans; Dionysius is 
just as ready to point out to the Romans of his own 
day their failure to maintain the high standards 
set by their ancestors. He contrasts the spirit of 
mutual helpfulness and forbearance that character- 
ized the relations of the plebeians and patricians in 
the early days with the era of bloodshed that began 
under Gaius Gracchus (ii. 11); similarly, he praises 
the simplicity of the first triumph (ii. 34), the 
excellent grounds on which Servius Tullius granted 
the franchise to manumitted slaves (iv. 24), the 
deference shown by the early consuls to the au- 
thority of the senate (v. 60), and the lawful and 
modest behaviour of the dictators down to the 
time of Sulla (v. 77), contrasting each of these 
practices and institutions with the evil forms they 
assumed in Jater days. In one instance (viii. 80) he 
leaves it to the reader to decide whether the tra- 
ditional Roman practice or the practice of the Greeks 
which some had recently wished to introduce at 
Rome, was the better. The pointing of al] these con- 
trasts is part of the historian’s function as moralist, 
the function which he had in mind when in his Leiter 
to Pompeius (chap. 3) he said that the attitude of 
Herodotus toward the events he was describing was 


XXUl 


INTRODUCTION 


everywhere fair, showing pleasure in those that were 
good and grief at those that were bad. Dionysius 
doubtless endeavoured to be fair and sincere in his 
judgments; but he was, nevertheless, biased in 
favour of the Romans and in favour of the senatorial 
party, the Optimates of his own day. He even 
attempts to palliate one or two of the less savoury 
incidents associated with Rome’s beginnings: he 
pictures Romulus as plunged into the depths of 
grief and despair at the death of Remus; and 
again, as addressing words of comfort and cheer to 
the captured Sabine maidens, assuring them that their 
seizure was in accordance with a good old Greek 
custom, and that it was the most distinguished way 
for women to be married! Livy makes no attempt 
to save the character of Romulus in the first in- 
stance, and in the second stops far short of Dionysius. 

In the matter of religion, also, Dionysius makes 
no concealment of his attitude. He frequently 
refers to a divine providence. He speaks scornfully 
of the professors of atheistic philosophies, ‘ if 
philosophies they should be called,’ who deny that 
the gods concern themselves with the affairs of 
mortals (ii. 68, 2; viii. 56, 1). He, for his part, is 
assured that the gods do sometimes intervene on 
behalf of the righteous (ii. 68 f.) and also to punish 
the wicked, as in the case of Pyrrhus (xx. 9 f.). 
The Romans, in particular, because of their piety 
and other virtues, had frequently been the recipients 
of divine favour, while the designs of their enemies 
were brought to naught (v. 54,1; vi. 13; vii. 12,4; 
viii. 26, 3). The gods, he holds, manifest their will 
through portents, and the disregarding of these may 


XXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


be severely punished, as in the case of Crassus (ii. 
6.4). Hence he recorded from time to time a goodly 
number of portents which he regarded as particularly 
noteworthy. With respect to the myths, he looked 
upon many of them, in which the gods played 
shameful parts, as blasphemous (ii. 18, 3); and, 
though he recognized that some of the Greek myths 
had a certain value as allegorical interpretations of 
natural phenomena, or as consolations in misfortune 
or other similar ways, he nevertheless felt that for 
the ignorant mass of mankind they did more harm 
than good, and he was more inclined himself to 
accept the Roman religion (ii. 20). It is to be 
observed that in relating myths he nowhere implies 
his own belief in them, but generally introduces 
them with some qualifying phrase, such as ‘ it is 
said,’ ‘ they say,” etc. 

Dionysius doubtless made what he considered to 
be a thorough study of Roman political institutions ; 
but his narrative constantly shows that he came 
far short of a real understanding of many of them. 
His failure to distinguish accurately between 
patricians and senators and between the patrum 
auctoritas and a senatus consultum is a source of no 
little confusion ; but, worse still, he often uses the 
Attic term προβούλευμα (preliminary decree) both 
for senatus consultum and for patrum auctoritas. 
His frequent use of ‘ patricians’ for ‘ senators’ is 
easily explained when we compare Livy, who con- 
stantly uses the word patres for both patricians and 
senators. This ambiguous term was doubtless found 
by both historians in their sources; indeed, in a 
few instances Dionysius carelessly retained the word 


xXXV 


INTRODUCTION 


as ‘ fathers’ (v. 33, 2; vi. 69, 2). In making his 
choice between the renderings ‘ patricians’ and 
‘senators’ he seems to have adopted the former 
wherever the patres seemed to be opposed as a 
class to the plebeians (e.g., iv. 8, 2; viii. 82, 4; 
ix. 42, 3). The term patrum auctoritas was ap- 
parently no better understood by Livy than by 
Dionysius; even for the early period he several 
times represents the auctoritas as preceding the 
vote of the comitia, and after the Publilian law of 
339, which required the auctoritas to be given before 
the people voted, he uses patrum auctoritas and 
senatus consultum indiscriminately. There is, in 
fact, every reason for believing that the term 
patrum auctoritas had become obsolete even in the 
time of the older annalists who were Livy’s chief 
sources. But Dionysius, with sources before him 
that probably showed no greater misunderstanding 
of this term than does Livy, made matters much 
worse as the result of his assumption that the 
patrum auctoritas, and indeed any decree of the 
senate, was usually a preliminary decree to be 
ratified by the people. This view justified him in 
using the word προβούλευμα, the name given to the 
programme of business prepared by the Athenian 
Boulé for the consideration of the Ecclesia. It can 
hardly have been the desire to use the word zpo- 
βούλευμα that led him to adopt its essential implica- 
tions; for he often uses δόγμα or ψήφισμα in the 
same way for a decree of the senate that was to be 
ratified by the people. He must have had some 
reason in the first place for believing that the 
patrum auctoritas was a necessary preliminary to 


ZAXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


action by the people. We know that it was cus- 
tomary for the consuls, as a matter of practical 
convenience, to ask the senate’s advice and secure 
its approval before bringing any important matter 
before the people, inasmuch as the action taken 
in the comitia would have to receive the patrum 
auctoritas later in order to be valid. If Dionysius 
was aware of this custom but not of its purpose, he 
might well reason that it was absurd for the senate 
to give its approval more than once to the same busi- 
ness, and hence, since he knew the patrum auctoritas 
was required for all votes of the people, he would 
naturally identify this term with the preliminary 
approval of the senate. It is true this view of the 
matter seems to be directly opposed to an important 
statement which he makes at the very outset. 
When defining the powers of the senate and of the 
people as established by Romulus, he states that 
the senate was to ratify the decisions of the people, 
but adds that in his own day the reverse principle 
was followed, the decrees of the senate then requiring 
the approval of the people (ii. 14, 3). The natural 
implication of his statement is that the change-had 
come about in fairly late times, but he nowhere in 
the extant books has anything more definite to say 
on the subject. In a very few instances he speaks 
of the “ patricians’ (doubtless to him identical with 
the senators) as ratifying a vote of the people 
afterwards, e.g., in the case of the election of Numa 
(ii. 60, 3) and the appointment of the first tribunes 
(vi. 90, 2); but as early as the election of Ancus 
Marcius he represents the people as ratifying the 
choice of the senators (iii. 36, 1), and a little later 


XXVii 


INTRODUCTION 


speaks of this as the normal procedure (iv. 40, 2; 
80, 2). In the last passage he is more explicit, 
declaring it to be the duty of the senate to consider 
in advance (zpofovAdev) all matters relating to 
the general welfare, and the duty of the people to 
ratify their decision. It is fairly evident, then, 
that Dionysius’ own theory was that a προβούλευμα 
of the senate had been necessary from the beginning. 
If his narrative occasionally violates this theory in 
practice, it is probably either because his sources 
were so explicit in particular instances that he felt 
he could not contradict them, or because he was 
negligent now and then and forgot to make his 
practice conform consistently to his theory. Another 
important matter in which he failed to make theory 
and practice coincide at all times will be mentioned 
a little later. It is not clear whether he believed the 
plebiscita, also, required a προβούλευμα ; his language 
is at times ambiguous and his accounts of the 
procedure in the case of various plebiscita are 
inconsistent with one another. He held the mis- 
taken view that all senators were patricians, even 
undér the republic; for he believed that plebeians 
were made patricians before being admitted to the 
senate (ii. 47, 1; v. 13, 2). But it is not in con- 
stitutional matters only that he made serious 
errors; there is confusion also in his account of 
religious matters. Thus, he uses * haruspex’ for 
‘augur ’ in ii. 22, 3, and his account of the duties 
of the pontifices (ii. 73) contains many errors.! 


1On the subject of this paragraph see Edw. Schwartz 
in the Real-Enc., s.v. Dionysius, pp. 940 ff., and E. Bux, 
Das Probuleuma bei Dionys. 


xxVil 


INTRODUCTION 


A few words must be said about Dionysius’ 
chronology. His date for the founding of Rome 
was 751 B.Cc., two years later than that adopted by 
Varro; and this difference between the two chronol- 
ogies remains constant for the first 304 years of the 
city down to the time of the decemvirs (the period 
covered by Books I[.-X.). At that point the gap 
widens: Dionysius represents the decemviral rule 
as continuing for a third year, while Varro assigned 
to it only two years. Accordingly, for the half- 
dozen years covered by Book XI. Dionysius’ dates 
are three years later than those of Varro. The 
fragments of the last nine books do not give any 
dates; but three sporadic references in the earlier 
books to events of the third and first centuries B.c. 
show that for this late period his dates are the same 
as Varro’s.! Dionysius devotes two chapters (i. 
74 f.) to explaining how he arrived at the date 751 
for the founding of the city, and for fuller informa- 
tion refers the reader to a separate work? that he 
had published to show how the Roman chronology 
was to be reduced to the Greek. There are other 
passages also which bear witness to the particular 
interest he felt in matters of chronology.? Not- 
withstanding all the attention he devoted to this 
side of his work, modern scholars have for the most 


11. 8, 1 (265 B.c.); ii. 25, 7 (231 B.c.); i. 3, 4 (7 B.c.). 
See O. Leuze, Die rém. Jahrzdhlung, pp. 189-93, for a 
plausible explanation of the closing of the gap between the 
two chronologies before the end of the fourth century. 

2 Xpovor, or Περὶ Χρόνων, cited by Clemens Alexandr., 
Strom. i. 102. 

91.63; 11.59; iv. 6 f., 30, 64; vi. 11; vii. 1. 


ΧΧΙΧ 


INTRODUCTION 


part been very harsh in their judgments of him in 
this very regard, accusing him of carelessness gener- 
ally in the matter of his dates and, in particular, of 
following one system of chronology for the period 
treated in his History and another for events nearer 
his own day. Our historian had to wait long for 
his vindication ; but one of the most recent investi- 
gators in the field of Roman chronology, Oscar 
Leuze, has come ably to his defence and shown that 
at least the more important of these charges of in- 
accuracy rest upon misunderstanding of Dionysius’ 
real meaning or of his usage.! 

Like most of the later Greek historians, Dionysius 
uses the reckoning by Olympiads, usually adding 
the name of the Athenian archon. From the 
beginning of the republic he normally gives the 
Greek date only for the first year of each Olympiad, 
identifying the intervening years merely by the 
names of the Roman magistrates. As the Athenian 
official year began in mid-summer and the Olympi- 
adic year of the historians either in mid-summer or 
early autumn, whereas the Roman consular year 
began, in later times, on January 1, though in 

1Die rim. Jahrzahlung, pp. 177-99. Of particular 
interest is his defence of Dionysius’ date for the beginning 
of the First Punic War (pp. 184-87). Leuze argues that 
Dionysius is here following a usage of Polybius and 
Diodorus, who in a number of instances regard as the 
beginning of a war, not the formal declaration of war or 
the first armed clash, but the event that was the immediate 
cause of the conflict. In the case in question this was 
Rome’s decision to aid the Mamertines, apparently at the 
end of the year 265. The Antiquities naturally included 
the events of the year 265 up to the sending of the 
Mamertine embassy to Rome. 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


earlier times at various seasons of the year, the 
Greek historians were confronted with an awkward 
problem in synchronizing Roman and Greek dates, 
The solution apparently followed by Dionysius, 
and probably by Polybius and Diodorus also, was 
to adopt the later Roman year of uniform length for 
all periods of Roman history, and to identify a 
given Roman year with the Olympiadic year in the 
course of which it began, rather than with that in 
which it ended (as is the modern practice). The 
dates given in the notes of the present edition follow 
this principle, only a single year being indicated as 
the modern equivalent of the Greek year, instead of 
parts of two years. Thus Olymp. 7, 1 is identified 
as 751 B.c. instead of 752/1. The only exceptions 
are a few dates of non-Roman events, where 
Dionysius was probably not concerned with the 
exact Roman equivalent. 

Dionysius was in theory opposed to the annal- 
istic method of writing history. In his Letter to 
Pompeius (chap. 3) he criticized Thucydides’ chrono- 
logical arrangement of events, by winters and 
summers, as seriously interrupting the continuity of 
the narrative, and praised Herodotus tor adopting 
the topical order. Yet when he himself was to 
write a history of Rome he evidently found it 
impracticable to avoid following the annalistic 
method in vogue among the Romans. For the regal 
period, it is true, he arranges the events of each 
reign under the two headings of wars and peaceful 
achievements. But beginning with the establish- 
ment of the republic, he treats the events of each 
year by themselves, first naming the consuls or 


ΧΧΧΙ 


INTRODUCTION 


other chief magistrates. For the greater part of 
the period that he covers this method could cause 
no confusion, as the military campaigns were of 
short duration; and it had the further advantage 
of avoiding monotony, since the narrative was 
constantly alternating between wars abroad and 
dissensions at home. 

As regards his sources, Dionysius states in his 
preface (chap. 7) that he had consulted the works 
of the approved Roman historians,—Cato, Fabius 
Maximus (Servilianus ?), Valerius Antias, Licinius 
Macer, Aeclius (Tubero), Gellius, Calpurnius (Piso) 
and many others.—and that he had also derived 
information from conversations with the most 
learned men. And at the end of Book I. (chap. 89) 
he refers to his careful reading of many works by 
both Greek and Roman writers on the subject of 
the origin of the Romans. His claim certainly 
appears to be justified, so far at least as Book I. is 
concerned. In this one book he cites no fewer than 
thirty Greek authors, most of them historians or 
logographers, and seven Roman writers, — Cato, 
Tubero and Piso, of those named above, and Fabius 
Pictor, Lucius Alimentus, C. Sempronius (Tudi- 
tanus) and Varro. To the last-named he owns his 
indebtedness for his account of the old cities of the 
Aborigines (chaps. 14 f.); but he probably owes 
considerable more to him in this book in places 
where he has not named his source. After the birth 
of Romulus and Remus there was scarcely any 
further occasion for using Greek sources; and he 
usually mentioned the Roman historians only in 
cases where there were divergent traditions. He 


INTRODUCTION 


naturally considered it to be his task as a historian 
to reconcile the different traditions so far as possible 
and present a smooth, uninterrupted narrative ; 
and in the main he has succeeded very well in doing 
so.1 But now and then he found such divergences 
among his sources that he could not ignore them. 
In such cases he presents the two or more versions 
and either expresses his own preference or, quite 
often, leaves the decision to the reader. At times 
he makes the decision with the greatest confidence, 
especially in matters of chronology. He is prompt 
to discover anachronisms, and rebukes rather 
sharply the historians who have carelessly per- 
petuated them; Licinius Macer and Cn. Gellius 
are thus censured on two occasions (vi. 1], 2; vii. 
1, 4), also Fabius Pictor (iv. 6 f.; 30, 2 f.), while 
Calpurnius Piso Frugi is named in one instance 
(iv. 7, 5) as the only one to give the correct version. 
It is generally recognized that he followed the late 
annalists as his principal sources; their histories 
were generally very voluminous, and in them he 
could find the full, detailed accounts which he 
frequently gives. His political orientation is that 
of the annalists of Sulla’s time, who were strong 
champions of the senate’s supremacy. They wrote 
their annals as propaganda, deliberately falsifying 
their account of events from time to time in order 
to make it appear that the senate had held from 
the first, or at least from the beginning of the 
republic, the same dominant position in the State 


1 A number of contradictions that appear in the History 


are probably due to his using first one source and then 
another. 


ae 
VOL. I. B 


INTRODUCTION 


that it held in the second and first centuries before 
Christ. They did this by representing the senate as 
having been consulted in early times on various 
occasions where tradition made no mention of any 
action on its part.1 Dionysius seems to have held 
the extreme view that even under the monarchy the 
senate had played a dominant part, the king’s 
power being limited much as at Sparta (ii. 14, 1 f.; 
cf. vi. 66, 3). This was his theory; but in actual 
practice his narrative mentions very few specific 
occasions where the senate was consulted by the 
king, and we gain the impression that the power of 
the latter was virtually supreme. But from the 
moment of the establishing of the republic his 
account of events is in strict agreement with his 
theory. His failure to reconcile practice and theory 
earlier argues a lack of inventiveness either on his 
part or on that of his sources; it probably did not 
seem worth the trouble to work out the details. 
This view of the senate’s original supremacy was 
the view taken also by Cicero in his De Republica; 
but it was not the view of Livy, who followed 
earlier annalists and rightly held that the senate 
had only gradually gained its wide powers. It is 
just such differences in orientation as this that 
make it fairly certain that Dionysius was not using 
Livy as his source in the numerous passages where 
their accounts seem at first sight strikingly similar.® 
Besides the authors cited by Dionysius, he also 

1A number of instances of this sort are discussed by 
Bux, Das Probuleuma, pp. 83-122. 


2See Schwartz, Real-Enc., pp. 946-57, for an analysis 
of some of these passages. 


XXXiV 


INTRODUCTION 


mentions a number of inscriptions, both at Rome 
and elsewhere, and there are sporadic references to 
the annales maximi, the records of the censors, ete. ; 
but he does not say that he had seen any of these 
himself, and it is probable that he found the ref- 
erences in the annalists. 

The first historian to cite Dionysius was Plutarch, 
who modelled his style upon that of the Antiquities. 
Schwartz held that Dionysius was Plutarch’s sole 
source for his Coriolanus, but this view is opposed 
by Bux. The Romulus and Numa may each con- 
tain a little from the Antiquities, the Camillus is 
chiefly based on Livy.? Dionysius is twice quoted 
in the Pyrrhus, but not enough of his account is 
preserved to enable us to make any accurate com- 
parison between the two. 


ScripTA RHETORICA 


The shorter works of Dionysius have generally 
gone under the name of Scripta Rhetorica; but 
they contain more of literary criticism than of 
technical rhetoric. They are all in the form of 
letters addressed to some literary friend, patron or 
pupil. There is no internal evidence to show whether 
they were composed before or after the History 
was published; but it is generally assumed that 
Dionysius wrote them from time to time during 
the years that he was engaged upon his great work. 
Although no absolute dates can be assigned to 
these several treatises, the relative order in which 


1 Goetzler, Einfluss des Dionys, p. 194. 
*So Schwartz, Real-Enc., pp. 943-45. 


XXXV 


INTRODUCTION 


they were composed can be determined in most 
cases by means of the frequent references in one to 
what the writer has already discussed or proposes 
to discuss in another. The order in which Roberts 
arranges them is as follows: 


. First Letter to Ammaeus. 

. On the Arrangement of Words. 
. On the Ancient Orators. 

. On the Style of Demosthenes. 
. On Imitation : Books I., II. 
Letter to Cn. Pompeius. 

On Imitation : Book III. 

. On Dinarchus. 

. On Thucydides. 


. Second Letter to Ammaeus. 


Θ᾿ ὁ εἰ δὶ οὐ WN 


— 


Egger would transpose the second and third 
items, seeing a greater maturity of judgment in the 
treatise on the Arrangement of Words. As regards 
the Dinarchus, he says we can be sure only that it 
was later than the Ancient Orators. 

The treatise on Imitation is known to us only 
from fragments. Only the first half of the study 
of the Ancient Orators is preserved, treating of 
Lysias, Isocrates and Isaeus; in the second part 
Demosthenes, Hyperides and Aeschines were dis- 
cussed. The treatise on the Style of Demosthenes is 
thought to be an enlarged edition of the discussion 
of Demosthenes in the earlier series. Other Works 
which have been lost were on the Choice of Words, 
on Figures, and on Political Philosophy, the latter 
a defence of the rhetoric of Lsocrates and his school 


ΧΧΧΥῚ 


INTRODUCTION 


against its Epicurean detractors. The early editions 
attributed to Dionysius an Ars Rhetorica, but this 
is no longer held to be his work. 

For a detailed account of the Scripta Rhetorica the 
reader is referred to Max. Egger, Denys d’ Hall- 
carnasse, pp. 20-246; a brief survey of these works 
may be found in W. Rhys Roberts, Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus : The Three Literary Leiters, pp. 
4-34. Roberts also gives (pp. 209-19) a bibliog- 
raphy of the Scripta Rhetorica down to the year 
1900. 

To his labours as literary critic Dionysius brought 
a wide and thorough acquaintance with the works 
of the Attic prose writers, a discriminating taste, 
and great industry and zeal. His chief merit as a 
critic lies in his purity of taste; he rejoiced in the 
recent triumph of Atticism over Asianism and did 
his best to strengthen that victory. His rhetorical 
works have much in common with those of Cicero, 
due to their both using many of the same sources. 
Like Cicero, Dionysius held Demosthenes in the 
greatest admiration; but this excessive admiration 
for one man seems to have made him unfair in his 
judgment of others: he tended to judge all the 
prose writers by the standards he set up for the 
orators. In other respects as well he is often 
narrow and superficial in his criticisms, and _ his 
manner is too dogmatic. 

The first reference to Dionysius as a rhetorician 
in any extant author is in Quintilian, who merely 
names him three times in lists of rhetoricians. In 
the third century the circle of Libanius paid some 
attention to him. From the fifth century onward 


XXXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


he was regarded by the Byzantines as the supreme 
authority on rhetoric. 


MANUSCRIPTS 


The manuscripts used by Jacoby for the first ten 
books of the Antiquities are as follows: 


. Chisianus 58, 10th cent. 
. Urbinas 105, 10th-11th cent. 
Coislinianus 150, 16th cent. 
. Regius Parisinus 1654 and 1655, 16th cent. 
. Vaticanus 133, 15th cent. 
. Urbinas 106, 15th cent. 


C and E also contain Book XI.; F contains 
only [.-V. 

The MSS. used for Book XI. and those for the 
Fragments of XII.-XX. will be listed in Vol. VII. 

A and B are by far the best of the MSS.; the 
others are all late, and some of them, especially 
C and D, contain numerous interpolations. The 
editio princeps was based on D. B was first used 
by Hudson, but he contented himself with giving 
its readings in his notes. The translators Bellanger 
and Spelman were prompt to adopt most of the 
good readings of B, and many were taken into the 
text by Reiske. Ritschl was the first to make a 
comparative study of A and B. As a result of his 
first investigation, based on insufficient evidence, he 
was inclined to rate A much higher than B; but 
later he showed a better appreciation of the good 
readings found only in B, and concluded that a 
sound text must rest upon a judicious use of both 


moon. 


at 


XXXVil! 


INTRODUCTION 


A and B,'—a conclusion in which Jacoby heartily 
concurred. Kiessling based his edition on B so far 
as possible. 

The individual symbols of the late MSS. appear 
very infrequently in Jacoby’s (and the present) 
critical apparatus, since these MSS. are rarely of 
any service in establishing the text. An occasional 
good reading found only in the margin of D (Dmg) 
may have been entered by R. Stephanus himself; in 
any event such readings are evidently based on 
conjecture rather than on the authority of any 
manuscript. 


EDITIONS 


The important editions of the Antiquities follow : 
Robert Estienne (Stephanus), Paris, 1546. The 
editio princeps of the Greek text. Books I.-XI. 
Based on the very inferior Cod. Reg. Paris. 1654-55. 
Friedrich Sylburg, Frankfort, 1586. Books I.-XI. 
and the Excerpta de Legationibus, translation 
(Gelenius’ version revised) and notes. Sylburg 
made use, chiefly in his notes, of two MSS., a 
Romanus (not to be identified) and a Venetus (272). 
Reprinted in careless form at Leipzig in 1691. 
John Hudson. Oxford, 1704. Books I.-XI. with 
the Excerpta de Legationibus and Excerpta de 
Virtutibus et Vitiis, a revision of Portus’ Latin 
translation, and notes of various scholars. Hudson 
was the first to use the Urbinas (which he called 


1 His monographs on Dionysius were reprinted in his 
Opuscula, Vol, i., pp. 471-540, 


ΧΧΧΙΣ 


INTRODUCTION 


Cod. Vaticanus), but cited its readings only in the 
notes. 

J. J. Reiske, Leipzig, 1774-75. The text and 
translation of Hudson’s edition with Reiske’s own 
notes added. Too late to accomplish much in 
Vol. I., Reiske discovered that the printer was 
faithfully reproducing all the typographical errors 
of Hudson’s edition ; but from Book III. 21 onward 
he corrected the proof sheets and also for the first 
time inserted the good readings of B in the text. 
Dionysius is often cited by the pages of this edition. 

Adolf Kiessling, Leipzig (Teubner), 1860-70. 


Based on B, so far as possible. 


Greek text and Latin translation (Portus revised). 
An unfortunate edition. Kiessling, after getting 
the work fairly started, dropped it completely ; 
and Prou, who was called upon to complete the 
task, was far from possessing Kiessling’s critical 
ability. Jacoby recognized the hand of Kiessling 
through the greater part of Books I.-III.; from 
that point on the edition has virtually no critical 
value. 

Besides these complete editions of the Antiquities, 
selected chapters were edited by D. C. Grimm 
(Archaeologiae Romanae quae ritus Romanos explicat 
Synopsis), Leipzig, 1786 ; J. J. Ambrosch (i. 9-38 ; 
ἢ. 1-29; ii. 30-56; ii. 64-74) in four academic 
Festschriften, Breslau, 1840-46; Fr. Ritschl (i. 
1-30), Bonn, 1846. Angelo Mai published at Milan, 
in 1816, some fragments from an epitome contained 


xl 


INTRODUCTION 


in a Milan MS., Cod. Ambrosianus Q 13 sup., and 
its copy, A 80 sup. These are now included (as 
the Excerpta Ambrosiana) among the Fragments of 


Books Xil.-XX. 


TRANSLATIONS 


The first Latin translation of the Antiquities 
(Books I.-XI.) was that of Lapus (or Lappus) 
Biragus, published at Treviso in 1480, three-quarters 
of a century before the first edition of the Greek 
text appeared. It possesses a special interest 
because it was based on two MSS., not as yet 
identified with any now extant, which were placed 
at the translator’s disposal by Pope Paul II. 
Ritschl argued that one of these must have belonged 
to the better class of MSS. now represented by A 
and B, since the translation contains most of the 
additions to the text of the editio princeps that are 
found in one or both of the older MSS.! Lapus’ 


1 Opuscula, i. pp. 489, 493. Since some of the inter- 
polations now found in C and D are included by Lapus, 
Ritschl concluded that he now and then consulted his 
later MS. for help (p. 530). Had Ritschl carried his 
investigation a little farther, he would have discovered 
that Lapus made diligent use of his older MS., closely 
related to B, only for Books I., 11. and the first third of 
Ill., after which he practically ignored it. (The good 
readings which he has in common with B in the later 
books are in virtually every instance found also in C.) 
Down to ili. 23 he has most of the good readings of B, 
including a goodly number that appear in no other 
MS., but he avoids nearly all of B’s errors; he also 
ignores the interpolations of C. From iii. 24 through 
Book XI. he nearly always agrees with C’s readings, 
including a number of the marginal interpolations; in a 


sli 


INTRODUCTION 


translation was reprinted, ‘ with corrections,’ but 
also with a multitude of fresh typographical errors, 
at Paris in 1529, and again, as revised by Glareanus, 
at Basle in 1532. A fresh translation of Books 
I.-X. by Gelenius, based on the text of the princeps, 
appeared at Basle in 1549; for Book XI. he merely 
reprinted Lapus’ translation. Sylburg (1586) revised 
the translation of Gelenius and added his own 
version of Book XI. Aemilius Portus brought out 
a new translation (Lausanne, 1588); and this trans- 
lation was adopted in the editions of Hudson and 
Reiske. and, with numerous corrections, in that of 
Kiessling-Prou. 

An Italian translation by Francesco Venturi 
appeared at Venice in 1545, one year before the 
editio princeps. The translator names as_ his 
sources a Greek copy, very difficult to read, and a 
Latin translation [Lapus] full of errors. Apparently 
no serious use was made of the manuscript ; it may 
well have proved to be generally inferior to Lapus’ 
reading. In any case, Venturi’s translation, with 
the exception of a few minor changes which were 
probably due to conjecture, presupposes the same 
Greek text as that of Lapus. Another Italian 
translation was published by M. Mastrofini, Rome, 


1812-13. 


very few cases he supplies a few words missing in both 
B and C, so that one or the other of his MSS. must have 
been better than its present representative. Since he 
refers to the confused order of the text in both his MSS. 
at the end of Book XI., bis older MS. cannot have been 
B; and the interpolated one cannot have been C, if C 18 


correctly assigned to the sixteenth century. 


ΧΙῊ 


INTRODUCTION 


A French version by G. F. le Jay (Paris, 1722) 
was loudly acclaimed by the admirers of the trans- 
lator as representing perfection itself; but the two 
men who next translated the Antiquities, Bellanger 
and Spelman, showed that it was a servile transla- 
tion of Portus’ Latin version, errors and all. The 
foliowing year Bellanger brought out, anonymously, 
his own translation, based on Hudson’s text and 
the good readings of B contained in Hudson’s notes. 
It is a smooth, fluent translation, but often rather 
free and at times little more than a paraphrase. It 
was reprinted later under Bellanger’s own name. 

In German there have been translations by J. L. 
Benzler (1752; reprinted 1771-72) and by G. J. 
Schaller and A. H. Christian (Stuttgart, 1827-50). 
Benzler’s version was quite free, that of Schaller 
(Books I.-IV.) accurate and scholarly; the part 
translated by Christian has not been seen by the 
present translator. 

The only English version to appear hitherto is 
that of Edward Spelman, which was published with 
notes and dissertations at London in 1758. It is a 
good and, for the most part, fairly close translation 
of Hudson’s text (Books I.-XI.) as improved by the 
good readings of the Urbinas and occasional con- 
jectural emendations. See further on p. xlv. 


The Greek text here presented is based on the 
edition of Jacoby, but departs rather frequently 
from his text. All significant departures are indi- 
cated in the critical notes, but not, as a rule, minor 
details of orthography, elision and crasis, or correc- 


xhij 


INTRODUCTION 


tions of obvious typographical errors that appear in 
his edition. Jacoby was fairly consistent in follow- 
ing out the principles which he had established with 
greater or less probability in two preliminary studies 
of Dionysian usage.! But in the case of some 
phrases and combinations of vowels for which he 
could not show that elision or crasis is normally to 
be expected, he vacillated in his attitude toward 
the MSS., sometimes following them in permitting 
hiatus and at other times emending; the present 
edition follows the MSS. (or some MS.) in all such 
cases. The MSS. are likewise followed in their 
spelling of the various forms of adjectives such as 
χαλκοῦς and χρυσοῦς. which appear in the con- 
tracted and the uncontracted forms with about 
equal trequency ; Jacoby occasionally emended an 
uncontracted form. He adopted the late spellings 
ἐπαύσθην and ἠλάσθην wherever they have the 
authority of any MS.,” and occasionally elsewhere ; 
in the present text the Attic forms ἐπαύθην and 
ἠλάθην are everywhere restored. 

The present editor has permitted himself the 
liberty of spelling a few Latin proper names in the 
Greek text in the manner that many an editor 
would have liked to spell them, but as only a few 
of the earlier editors ventured to do in actual 


1(a) Observationes criticae in Dionysit Hal. Anti- 
quitates Romanas, in Acta Socieiatis Philol. Lipsiensis, i. 
(1871), 287-344. (b) Ueber die Sprache des Dionysios von 
Halikarnassos in der Rom. Archdologie, Aarau, 1874. 

2In one instance C alone seems to show the o; else- 
where the only MS. giving it is B (about half the time), 
but even in this MS. the o has usually been deleted by a 
correcting hand. 


xliv 


INTRODUCTION 


practice, and th:n only in the case of part of the 
names. It is hard to believe that Dionysius would 
have written such forms, for example, as Φαιστύλος 
for Φαυστύλος (compare his correct form Davarivos), 
Awpevrov (in Book I.) for Aavpevrov (the form found 
in Book V.; cf. “αυρεντῖνοι and Aavpertia), or 
Aadva for Aaovivia in such a context as i. 59, 3 (and 
if he wrote the correct form here, he must have 
used it elsewhere). 

The critical apparatus lists only the more im- 
portant variants and emendations; many simple 
emendations made by the early editors and adopted 
in subsequent editions are passed over in silence. 
No fresh collations of the MSS. have been available ; 
but here and there an obvious error in Jacoby’s 
report has been corrected or a suspicious entry 
queried. 

The present translation is based on that of 
Spelman. His rendering of numerous passages, 
more especially in the speeches, is so spirited and 
so idiomatic, and often requires so few changes to 
make it seem thoroughly modern in tone, that it 
seemed desirable to use what was best of it in pre- 
paring this version for the Loeb Classical Library. 
If Spelman had been at his best more uniformly, a 
mild revision, to bring his translation into accord 
with the present Greek text, would have been all 
that was required. But the quality of his English 
is very uneven. He constructs a good many long, 
cumbersome sentences, in imitation of the Greek, 
shows an excessive fondness for the absolute use of 
the participle, and at times uses a vocabulary that 
seems more Latin than English. Where he thus 


xlv 


INTRODUCTION 


departs from a good English style, and wherever his 
rendering is not sufficiently close to the Greek for 
the present purpose, changes have been freely made, 
some of them very drastic. No attempt has been 
made to preserve the antique flavour that character- 
izes Spelman’s rendering, as a whole, inasmuch as 
the passages which he has rendered most successfully 
from other points of view are usually the most 
modern in diction. He did not translate the frag- 
ments; they appear here in English for the first 
time. The notes with which Spelman accom- 
panied his version were scholarly and useful in their 
day, but have not the same interest now ; accord- 
ingly, an entirely new set of notes has been prepared 
for this edition. 

For the convenience of the reader parallel 
passages from Livy have been indicated in the 
notes, beginning with i. 64. 


xl vi 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A BIBLIOGRAPHY of the Roman Antiquities covering the 
period from 1774 to 1876 was published by Jacoby in 
Philologus, xxxvi. (1877), pp. 129-31, 152-54. It was 
continued in the introductions to the several volumes of 
his edition, including the Index (1925). To the lists there 
given should be added : 

Edw. Schwartz. in Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Encyclopadie, 
8.0. Dionysius, cols. 934-61. 

Max. Egger, Denys d’Halicarnasse (Paris, 1902) pp. 
1-19, 247-98. An excellent study of Dionysius, more 
particularly as rhetorician. 

H. Liers, Die Theorie der Geschichtsschreibung des Dionys 
von Halikarnass, Waldenburg, 18386. 

Eiliv Skard, Epigraphische Formeln ber Dionys von 
Halikarnass, in Symbolae Osloenses xi. (1932). 55-60. 

E. Gaida, Die Schlachtschilderungen in den Antiquitates 
Romanae des Dionys von Halikarnass, Breslau, 1934. 


xivil 


SIGLA 


A = Chisianus 58. 

B = Urbinas 105. 

C = Coislinianus 150. 

D = Regius Parisinus 1654 and 1655. 
E = Vaticanus 133. 

F = Urbinas 106. 

O = All! the MSS. 

R = All! the MSS. not otherwise cited. 


a, b, and occasionally c, added to the symbol of a MS. 
indicate the successive hands; mg denotes a marginal 


entry. 


Steph. = editio princeps of R. Stephanus. 
Steph.? = 


notes of H. Stephanus. 


1 But there is good reason for suspecting that Jacoby 
usually ignored E and F; in fact, he nowhere seems to 


cite the latter individually. 


xivuli 


THE ROMAN ANTIQUITIES 
OF 
DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ALOR 2 νν 
AAIKAPNASEOS 
POMAIKH: APXAIOAOTIA® 


AOQOTOS TPHTOF 


> ~ 

I. Τοὺς εἰωθότας ἀποδίδοσθαι ἐνὶ τοῖς προ- 

, ~ ε ~ / - 
οιμίοις τῶν ἱστοριῶν λόγους ἥκιστα βουλόμενος 
\ > “ - - 
ἀναγκάζομαι περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ προειπεῖν, οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς 
90.» / / > / Δ » - 
ἰδίοις μέλλων πλεονάζειν ἐπαίνοις, οὗς ἐπαχθεῖς 
> , Ξ > ͵΄ » \ 
οἶδα φαινομένους τοῖς ἀκούουσιν, οὔτε διαβολὰς 

> \ A 
καθ᾽ ἑτέρων ἐγνωκὼς ποιεῖσθαι συγγραφέων, 

͵ \ / > - 

ὥσπερ ᾿Δναξιμένης Σ καὶ Θεόπομπος ἐν τοῖς προ- 
΄ ~ ¢ ~ > ΄ > \ \ > ~ 
οιμίοις τῶν ἱστοριῶν ἐποίησαν, ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἐμαυτοῦ 
λογισμοὺς ἀποδεικνύμενος, οἷς ἐχρησάμην ὅτε ἐπὶ 
ταύτην ὥρμησα τὴν πραγματείαν, καὶ περὶ τῶν 
ἀφορμῶν ἀποδιδοὺς λόγον, ἐξ ὧν τὴν ἐμπειρίαν 
~ > / ΄ - 
ἔλαβον τῶν γραφησομένων. ἐπείσθην γὰρ ὅτι δεῖ 
- ΄ «ς ~ ~ 
τοὺς προαιρουμένους μνημεῖα τῆς ἑαυτῶν ψυχῆς 


1 ἐν Steph.*: om. O, Jacoby. 
2C. Miller, Usener: ἀναξίλαος O. 


a 


1 Anaximenes of Lampsacus wrote a history of Greece 
(down to the battle of Mantinea) and a history of Philip 


2 


THE ROMAN ANTIQUITIES 
OF 
DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


BOOK I! 


I, Although it is much against my will to indulge 
in the explanatory statements usually given in the 
prefaces to histories, yet 1 am obliged to prefix 
to this work some remarks concerning myself. In 
doing this it is neither my intention to dwell too 
long on my own praise, which I know would be 
distasteful to the reader, nor have I the purpose 
of censuring other historians, as Anaximenes and 
Theopompus! did in the prefaces to their his- 
tories but I shall only show the reasons that in- 
duced me to undertake this work and give an 
accounting of the sources from which I gained the 
knowledge of the things I am going to relate. For 
I am convinced that all who propose to leave such 
monuments of their minds to posterity as time shall 


of Macedon; also an epic on Alexander. Theopompus 
in his Hellenica continued the history of Thucydides from 
411 down to the battle of Cnidus in 394; his Philippica, 
in 58 books, treated not only of Philip but of contemporary 
events elsewhere. 


3 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τοῖς ἐπιγιγνομένοις καταλιπεῖν, ἃ μὴ συναφανι- 
σθήσεται τοῖς σώμασιν αὐτῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ χρόνου, 
καὶ πάντων μάλιστα τοὺς ἀναγράφοντας ἱστορίας, 
ἐν αἷς καθιδρῦσθαι τὴν ἀλήθειαν ὑπολαμβάνομεν 1 
ἀρχὴν φρονήσεώς τε καὶ σοφίας οὖσαν, πρῶτον 
μὲν ὑποθέσεις προαιρεῖσθαι καλὰς καὶ μεγαλο- 
πρεπεῖς καὶ πολλὴν ὠφέλειαν τοῖς ἀναγνωσομένοις 
φερούσας, ἔπειτα παρασκευάζεσθαι τὰς ἐπιτηδείους 
εἰς τὴν ἀναγραφὴν τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἀφορμὰς μετὰ 
πολλῆς ἐπιμελείας τε καὶ φιλοπονίας. οἱ μὲν γὰρ 
ὑπὲρ ἀδόξων πραγμάτων ἢ πονηρῶν ἢ μηδεμιᾶς 
σπουδῆς ἀξίων ἱστορικὰς καταβαλόμενοι πραγ- 
ματείας, εἴτε τοῦ προελθεῖν εἰς γνῶσιν ὀρεγόμενοι 
καὶ τυχεῖν ὁποιουδήποτε ὀνόματος, εἴτε περιουσίαν 
ἐπιδείξασθαι 5 τῆς περὶ λόγους δυνάμεως βουλό- 
μενοι, οὔτε τῆς γνώσεως ζηλοῦνται παρὰ τοῖς 
ἐπιγιγνομένοις οὔτε τῆς δυνάμεως ἐπαινοῦνται, 
δόξαν ἐγκαταλιπόντες τοῖς ἀναλαμβάνουσιν αὐτῶν 
τὰς ἱστορίας ὅτι τοιούτους ἐζήλωσαν αὐτοὶ βίους, 
οἵας ἐξέδωκαν τὰς γραφάς ἐπιεικῶς γὰρ ἅπαντες 
νομίζουσιν εἰκόνας εἶναι τῆς ἑκάστου ψυχῆς τοὺς 
λόγους. οἱ δὲ προαιρούμενοι μὲν τὰς κρατίστας 
ὑποθέσεις, εἰκῆ δὲ καὶ ῥᾳθύμως αὐτὰς συντιθέντες 
ἐκ τῶν ἐπιτυχόντων ἀκουσμάτων, οὐδένα ὑπὲρ τῆς 
προαιρέσεως ἔπαινον κομίζονται - οὐ γὰρ ἀξιοῦμεν 
αὐτοσχεδίους οὐδὲ ῥᾳθύμους εἶναι τὰς περί τε 
πόλεων ἐνδόξων καὶ ἀνδρῶν ἐν δυναστείᾳ γεγονό- 
των ἀναγραφομένας ἱστορίας ταῦτα δὴ νομίσας 
ἀναγκαῖα καὶ πρῶτα θεωρήματα τοῖς ἱστορικοῖς 


1 ὑπολαμβάνομεν B: ὑπολαμβάνομεν πάντες A. 


2 


BOOK I. 1, 2-4 


not involve in one common ruin with their bodies, 
and particularly those who write histories, in which 
we have the right to assume that Truth, the source 
of both prudence and wisdom, is enshrined, ought, 
first of all, to make choice of noble and lofty subjects 
and such as will be of great utility to their readers, 
and then, with great care and pains, to provide 
themselves with the proper equipment for the 
treatment of their subject. For those who base 
historical works upon deeds inglorious or evil 
or unworthy of serious study, either because they 
erave to come to the knowlege of men and to get 
a name of some sort or other, or because they 
desire to display the wealth of their rhetoric, are 
neither admired by posterity for their fame nor 
praised for their eloquence; rather, they leave 
this opinion in the minds of all who take up their 
histories, that they themselves admired lives which 
were of a piece with the writings they published, since 
it is a just and a general opinion that a man’s words 
are the images of his mind. Those, on the other 
hand, who, while making choice of the best subjects, 
are careless and indolent in compiling their narra- 
tives out of such reports as chance to come to their 
ears gain no praise by reason of that choice; for 
we do not deem it fitting that the histories of re- 
nowned cities and of men who have held supreme 
power should be written in an offhand or negligent 
manner. As 1 believe these considerations to be 
necessary and of the first importance to historians 





*Schwartz: ἀποδείξασθαι OQ, Jacoby. 


bo 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


εἶναι Kai πολλὴν ποιησάμενος ἀμφοτέρων ἐπι- 
μέλειαν οὔτε παρελθεῖν τὸν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν λόγον 
ἐβουλήθην οὔτε ἐν ἄλλῳ τινὶ τόπῳ καταχωρίσαι 
μᾶλλον ἢ τῷ προοιμίῳ τῆς πραγματείας. 

II. Τὴν μὲν οὖν ὑπόθεσιν ὅτι καλὴν εἴληφα καὶ 
μεγαλοπρεπῆ καὶ πολλοῖς ὠφέλιμον οὐ μακρῶν 
οἶμαι δεήσειν λόγων τοῖς γε δὴ μὴ παντάπασιν 
ἀπείρως ἔχουσι τῆς κοινῆς ἱστορίας. εἰ γάρ τις 
ἐπιστήσας τὴν διάνοιαν ἐπὶ τὰς παραδεδομένας ἐκ 
τοῦ παρεληλυθότος χρόνου πόλεών τε καὶ ἐθνῶν 
ἡγεμονίας, ἔπειτα χωρὶς ἑκάστην σκοπῶν καὶ παρ᾽ 
ἀλλήλας ἐξετάζων διαγνῶναι βουληθείη τίς αὐτῶν 
ἀρχήν τε μεγίστην ἐκτήσατο καὶ πράξεις ἀπεδείξατο 
αμπροτάτας ἐν εἰρήνῃ τε καὶ κατὰ πολέμους, 
μακρῷ δή τινι τὴν “Ρωμαίων ἡγεμονίαν ἁπάσας 
ὑπερβεβλημένην ὄψεται τὰς πρὸ αὐτῆς μνημονευο- 
μένας, οὐ μόνον κατὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς ἀρχῆς καὶ 
κατὰ τὸ κάλλος τῶν πράξεων, ἃς οὔπω κεκόσμηκε 
λόγος οὐδεὶς ἀξίως, ἀλλὰ καὶ κατὰ τὸ μῆκος τοῦ 
περιειληφότος αὐτὴν χρόνου μέχρι τῆς Kal” ἡμᾶς 
ἡλικίας. ἡ μὲν γὰρ Ἀσσυρίων ἀρχὴ παλαιά τις 
οὖσα καὶ εἰς τοὺς μυθικοὺς ἀναγομένη χρόνους 
ὀλίγου τινὸς ἐκράτησε τῆς Ασίας μέρους. ἡ δὲ 
Μηδικὴ καθελοῦσα τὴν Ἀσσυρίων καὶ μείζονα 
δυναστείαν περιβαλομένη χρόνον οὐ πολὺν κατ- 
ἔσχεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τῆς τετάρτης κατελύθη γενεᾶς. 
Πέρσαι δὲ οἱ Μήδους καταγωνισάμενοι τῆς μὲν 
᾿Ασίας ὀλίγου δεῖν πάσης τελευτῶντες ἐκράτησαν, 
ἐπιχειρήσαντες δὲ καὶ τοῖς Εὐρωπαίοις ἔθνεσιν οὐ 


6 


BOOK I. 1, 4-2, 2 


and as I have taken great care to observe them 

both, I have felt unwilling either to omit mention 
of them or to give it any other place than in the 
reface to my work. 

II. That I have indeed made choice of a subject 
noble, lofty and usefu! to many will not. I think. 
require any lengthy argument, at least for those 
who are not utterly unacquainted with universal 
history. For if anyone turns his attention to the 
successive supremacies both of cities and of nations. 
as accounts of them have been handed down from 
times past, and then, surveying them severally and 
comparing them together, wishes to determine which 
of them obtained the widest dominion and both in 
peace and war performed the most brilliant achieve- 
ments, he will find that the supremacy of the Romans 
has far surpassed all those that are recorded from 
earlier times, not only in the extent of its domin- 
ion and in the splendour of its achievements—which 
no account has as yet worthily celebrated—but also 
in the length of time during which it has endured 
down to our day. For the empire of the Assyrians, 
ancient as it was and running back to legendary 
times, held sway over only a small part of Asia. 
That of the Medes, after overthrowing the Assyrian 
empire and obtaining a still wider dominion, did not 
hold it long, but was overthrown in the fourth 
generation.! The Persians, who conquered the 
Medes, did, indeed, finally become masters of almost 
all Asia; but when they attacked the nations of 
Europe also, they did not reduce many of them to 


Τὴ 550 B.c., in the reign of Astyages, the fourth 
Median king according to Herodotus. 


7 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ ς / ᾽ ~ / 
πολλὰ ὑπηγάγοντο, χρόνον τε οὐ πολλῷ πλείονα 
διακοσίων ἐτῶν ἔμειναν ἐπὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς. ἡ δὲ 
Μακεδονικὴ δυναστεία τὴν [Π]ερσῶν καθελοῦσα 
ἰσχὺν μεγέθει μὲν ἀρχῆς ἁπάσας ὑπερεβάλετο τὰς 
πρὸ αὐτῆς, χρόνον δὲ οὐδὲ αὕτη πολὺν ἤνθησεν, 
ἀλλὰ μετὰ τὴν ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τελευτὴν ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον 
ἡ ‘peo ὃ θεῖ yp εἰς πολλοὺ 
ἤρξατο φέρεσθαι. διασπασθεῖσα γὰρ εἰς πολλοὺς 
ἡγεμόνας εὐθὺς ἀπὸ τῶν διαδόχων καὶ μετ᾽ ἐκείνους 
ἄχρι τῆς δευτέρας ἢ τρίτης ἰσχύσασα προελθεῖν 
γενεᾶς, ἀσθενὴς αὐτὴ δι᾿ ἑαυτῆς ἐγένετο καὶ 

~ ε \ « / > / \ > A 
τελευτῶσα ὑπὸ “Ῥωμαίων ἠφανίσθη. καὶ οὐδὲ 
αὕτη ἴ μέντοι πᾶσαν ἐποιήσατο γῆν τε καὶ θάλασσαν 
ὑπήκοον - οὔτε γὰρ Λιβύης, ὅτι μὴ τῆς πρὸς 
Αἰγύπτῳ ob? πολλῆς οὔσης, ἐκράτησεν οὔτε τὴν 

> / - ε / > \ ~ \ / 
Εὐρώπην ὅλην ὑπηγάγετο, ἀλλὰ τῶν μὲν βορείων 
~ ~ / ~ ~ 
αὐτῆς μερῶν μέχρι Θράκης προῆλθε, τῶν δ᾽ 
ς / / ~ > ~ / ᾽ὔ 
ἑσπερίων μέχρι τῆς ἀδριανῆς κατέβη θαλάσσης. 
Ill. Αἱ μὲν οὖν ἐπιφανέσταται τῶν πρόσθεν ἡγε- 
΄ ~ « 
μονιῶν, ἃς παρειλήφαμεν ἐκ τῆς ἱστορίας, τοσαύτην 
ἀκμήν τε καὶ ἰσχὺν λαβοῦσαι κατελύθησαν τὰς γὰρ 
« ᾿ A / > Μ > ~ > / 
Ελληνικὰς δυνάμεις οὐκ ἄξιον αὐταῖς ἀντιπαρεξετά- 
Cew, οὔτε μέγεθος ἀρχῆς οὔτε χρόνον ἐπιφανείας 
τοσοῦτον ὅσον ἐκεῖναι λαβούσας. ᾿Αθηναῖοι μέν 
γε αὐτῆς μόνον ἦρξαν τῆς παραλίου δυεῖν δέοντα 
¢ / ” ‘ > \ 4 ς / > A 
ἑβδομήκοντα ἔτη Kal οὐδὲ ταύτης ἁπάσης, ἀλλὰ 


1 αὕτη Biicheler: αὐτὴ Ο. 3 οὐ added by Casaubon. 





1550-330 B.c. 
δ κ.6. ‘‘ Successors,” the term applied to the generals 


8 


BOOK I. 2, 2-3, 2 


submission, and they continued in power not much 
above two hundred years. The Macedonian domin- 
ion, which overthrew the might of the Persians, did, 
in the extent of its sway, exceed all its predecessors, 
yet evenit did not flourish long, but after Alexander’s 
death began to decline; for it was immediately par- 
titioned among many commanders from the time of 
the Diadochi,? and although after their time it was 
able to go on to the second or third generation, yet 
it was weakened by its own dissensions and at 
the last destroyed by the Romans.* But even the 
Macedonian power did not subjugate every country 
and every sea; for it neither conquered Libya, with 
the exception of the small portion bordering on 
Egypt, nor subdued all Europe, but in the North 
advanced only as far as Thrace and in the West down 
to the Adriatic Sea. 

IIIf. Thus we see that the most famous of the 
earlier supremacies of which history has given us 
any account, after attaining to so great vigour and 
might, were overthrown. As for the Greek powers, 
it is not fitting to compare them to those just 
mentioned, since they gained neither magnitude of 
empire nor duration of eminence equal to theirs. 
For the Athenians ruled only the sea coast, dur- 
ing the space of sixty-eight years,* nor did their sway 
extend even over all that, but only to the part 


of Alexander who divided his empire among themselves 
after his death. 

3’ By the overthrow of Perseus in 168, or possibly by 
the defeat of Philip V in 197, followed by that of Antiochus 
in 190. Compare chap. 3 (end). 

4 From ca. 472 to 404. 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ > A ~ 
τῆς ἐντὸς Εὐξείνου τε πόντου Kat τοῦ Παμφυλίου 
/ <4 / > / 
πελάγους, ὅτε μάλιστα ἐθαλασσοκράτουν. Aaxe- 
ὃ / δὲ 7 \ ~ » 
αιμόνιοι δὲ Π]ελοποννήσου καὶ τῆς ἄλλης κρα- 
΄ « 
τοῦντες ᾿Ελλάδος ἕως Μακεδονίας τὴν ἀρχὴν 
προὐβίβασαν, ἐπαύθησαν δὲ ὑπὸ Θηβαίων οὐδὲ 
4 
ὅλα τριάκοντα ἔτη τὴν ἀρχὴν κατασχόντες. ἡ δὲ 
« ΄ 
᾿ωμαίων πόλις ἁπάσης μὲν ἄρχει γῆς ὅση μὴ 
> / , >] > > e > > 4, a 
ἀνέμβατός ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων κατοικεῖται, 
/ ~ ~ 
πάσης δὲ κρατεῖ θαλάσσης, οὐ μόνον τῆς ἐντὸς 
« 7, - ~ 
Ηρακλείων στηλῶν, ἀλλὰ Kai τῆς ᾿Ωκεανίτιδος 
“ - 1. 2 4 
ὅση πλεῖσθαι μὴ ἀδύνατός ἐστι, πρώτη καὶ μόνη 
- > ~ ~ 
τῶν ἐκ τοῦ παντὸς αἰῶνος μνημονευομένων ava- 
A ~ / 
todas καὶ δύσεις ὅρους ποιησαμένη τῆς δυναστείας * 
/ ~ ~ 
χρόνος Te αὐτῇ τοῦ κράτους οὐ βραχύς, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσος 
> ~ ~ » ” / ΕΣ ~ 
οὐδεμιᾷ τῶν ἄλλων οὔτε πόλεων οὔτε βασιλειῶν. 
~ A 
εὐθὺς μὲν yap ἐξ ἀρχῆς μετὰ τὸν οἰκισμὸν τὰ 
πλησίον ἔθνη πολλὰ καὶ μάχιμα ὄντα προσήγετο 
\ ΕΝ as ~ / ‘ > 7 
καὶ προὔβαινεν ἀεὶ πᾶν δουλουμένη τὸ ἀντίπαλον" 
΄- A ς 
ταῦτα δὲ πέντε καὶ τετταράκοντα ἤδη πρὸς ἕπτα- 
/ ” / > > 4 / / / 
κοσίοις ἔτεσίν ἐστιν εἰς ὑπάτους Κλαύδιον Νέρωνα 
\ / ς / 1 LTT / Kad ΄ 
τὸ δεύτερον ὑπατεύοντα καὶ [Πείσωνα ἰζαλπούρνιον, 
A“ ἘΠ \ 
Ol κατὰ τὴν τρίτην ἐπὶ Tals ἐνενήκοντα Kal ἑκατὸν 
)λ ,ὔ > ὃ / θ > - δὲ 5A > / 
ὀλυμπιάσιν ἀπεδείχθησαν. ἐξ οὗ de ὅλης ἐκρά- 
> / 130m \ c / Ag 3 \ 
τησεν IraXias καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν ἁπάντων ἐθάρρησεν apynv 


1 ὑπατεύοντα deleted (with Suidas) by Reudler, Jacoby. 





1This statement is puzzling, since the period actually 
extended from the surrender of Athens in 404 to the 
battle of Leuctra in 371. The text may be corrupt. 

2 Dionysius may have had in mind Pytheas’ report ofa 
πεπηγυῖα θάλασσα (a sea filled with floating ice?) in the far 


10 


BOOK 1. 3, 2-5 


between the Euxine and the Pamphylian seas, when 
their naval supremacy was at its height. The Lace- 
daemonians, when masters of the Peloponnesus and 
the rest of Greece, advanced their rule as far as 
Macedonia, but were checked by the Thebans before 
they had held it quite thirty years.! But Rome 
rules every country that is not inaccessible or unin- 
habited, and she is mistress of every sea, not only 
of that which lies inside the Pillars of Hercules but 
also of the Ocean, except that part of it which is 
not navigable *; she is the first and the only State 
recorded in all time that ever made the risings and 
the settings of the sun the boundaries of her domin- 
ion. Nor has her supremacy been of short duration, 
but more lasting than that of any other common- 
wealth or kingdom. For from the very begin- 
ning, immediately after her founding, she began to 
draw to herself the neighbouring nations, which 
were both numerous and warlike, and continually 
advanced, subjugating every rival. And it is now 
seven hundred and forty-five years from her founda- 
tion down to the consulship of Claudius Nero, consul 
for the second time, and of Calpurnius Piso, who 
were chosen in the one hundred and ninety-third 
Olympiad.* From the time that she mastered the 
whole of Italy she was emboldened to aspire to 


north. From Eratosthenes we learn also that that other 
early navigator, the Carthaginian Hanno, who sailed far 
south along the west coast of Africa, was finally forced by 
aed difficulties (of what sort we are not told) to turn 
back. 

’Nero and Piso were consuls in 7 B.c. This was the 
year 745 of the City according to Dionysius, who assigns 
its founding to the year 751, See chap. 74, 


tl 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


προελθεῖν, ἐκβαλοῦσα μὲν ἐκ τῆς θαλάττης Kapyn- 
δονίους, of πλείστην ἔσχον ναυτικὴν δύναμιν, ὑπο- 
/ \ ~ / Δ ᾽ὔ 0. ἡ 
χείριον δὲ λαβοῦσα Makedoviav, ἣ τέως ἐδόκει 
μέγιστον ἰσχύειν κατὰ γῆν, οὐδὲν ἔτι ἀντίπαλον 
ἔχουσα οὔτε βάρβαρον φῦλον οὔτε ᾿λληνικὸν γε- 
νεὰν ἑβδόμην ἤδη τὴν ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ διαμένει παντὸς 
ἄρχουσα τόπου ἔθνος δὲ οὐδὲν ὡς εἰπεῖν ἐστιν ὃ 
περὶ τῆς κοινῆς ἡγεμονίας ἢ τοῦ μὴ ἄρχεσθαι πρὸς 
αὐτὴν διαφέρεται. ἀλλὰ γὰρ ὅτι μὲν οὔτε τὴν 
ἐλαχίστην τῶν ὑποθέσεων προήρημαι, καθάπερ 
ΝΜ »” \ / \ > / / 
ἔφην, οὔτε περὶ φαύλας καὶ ἀσήμους πράξεις 
ΝΜ / > \ / / , 
ἔγνωκα διατρίβειν, ἀλλὰ περί τε πόλεως γράφω 
τῆς περιφανεστάτης καὶ περὶ πράξεων ὧν οὐκ ἂν 
” © AD > / , > 5.0} 
ἔχοι τις ἑτέρας ἐπιδείξασθαι λαμπροτέρας, οὐκ οἷδ 
ὅ τι δεῖ πλείω λέγειν. 
σ > > Μ ~ \ / 
Orn δ᾽ οὐκ ἄνευ λογισμοῦ καὶ προνοίας 
ἔμφρονος ἐπὶ τὰ παλαιὰ τῶν ἱστορουμένων περὶ 
αὐτῆς ἐτραπόμην, ἀλλ᾽ ἔχων εὐλογίστους ἀποδοῦναι 
τῆς προαιρέσεως αἰτίας, ὀλίγα βούλομαι προειπεῖν, 
ἵνα μή τινες ἐπιτιμήσωσί μοι τῶν πρὸς ἅπαντα 
φιλαιτίων, οὐδέν mw! τῶν μελλόντων δηλοῦσθαι 
προακηκοότες, ὅτι τῆς ἀοιδίμου γενομένης καθ᾽ 
ἡμᾶς πόλεως ἀδόξους καὶ πάνυ ταπεινὰς τὰς 
¢ “ 
ηρώτας ἀφορμὰς λαβούσης καὶ οὐκ ἀξίας ἱστορικῆς 
σ΄ εκ “ » 
ἀναγραφῆς, οὐ πολλαῖς δὲ γενεαῖς πρότερον εἰς 
> ae \ , > , > - , 
ἐπιφάνειαν καὶ δόξαν ἀφιγμένης, ἐξ οὗ Tas τε 
1 πω Cobet: οὔπω O. 





1This would normally mean six full generations plus 
part of another. If Dionysius was counting from the battle 
of Pydna (168), he must have reckoned a generation here 


12 


BOOK 1. 3, 5+, 1 


govern all mankind, and after driving from off the 
sea the Carthaginians, whose maritime strength was 
superior to that of all others, and subduing Mace- 
donia, which until then was reputed to be the most 
powerful nation on land, she no longer had as rival 
any nation either barbarian or Greek; and it is now 
in my day already the seventh generation | that she 
has continued to hold sway over every region of the 
world, and there is no nation, as I may say, that 
disputes her universal dominion or protests against 
being ruled by her. However, to prove my state- 
ment that I have neither made choice of the most 
trivial of subjects nor proposed to treat of mean and 
insignificant deeds, but am undertaking to write 
not only about the most illustrious city but also 
about brilliant achievements to whose like no man 
could point, 1 know not what more I need say. 

IV. But before I proceed, I desire to show in a few 
words thatitis not without design and mature premed- 
itation that I have turned to the early part of Rome’s 
history, but that I have weli-considered reasons 
to give for my choice, to forestall the censure 
of those who, fond of finding fault with everything 
and not as yet having heard of any of the matters 
which I am about to make known, may blame me 
because, in spite of the fact that this city, grown so 
famouse in our days, had very humble and inglori- 
ous beginnings, unworthy of historical record, and 
that it was but a few generations ago, that is, 


at less than twenty-eight years (his usual estimate); but 
he may have felt that the Macedonian power was broken at 
Cynoscephalae (197). Or the seven generations may have 
been actually counted in some important family. 


13 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ / 

Μακεδονικὰς καθεῖλε δυναστείας Kat τοὺς Φοινι- 
A / / > / ~ > / 
κικοὺς κατώρθωσε πολέμους, ἐξόν μοι τῶν ἐνδόξων 
τινὰ λαβεῖν αὐτῆς ὑποθέσεων, ἐπὶ τὴν οὐδὲν ἔχουσαν 

> ~ 
ἐπιφανὲς ἀρχαιολογίαν ἀπέκλινα. ἔτι yap ayvoei- 
A 7 σ 3 / ~ ~ ε \ 
ται παρὰ τοῖς “λλησιν ὀλίγου δεῖν πᾶσιν ἡ παλαιὰ 
~ e / / ς ’ \ / A > 
τῆς “Ῥωμαίων πόλεως ἱστορία, Kat δόξαι τινὲς οὐκ 
> - > > > ~ > / > ’ὔ \ 
ἀληθεῖς ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἐπιτυχόντων ἀκουσμάτων τὴν 
ἀρχὴν λαβοῦσαι τοὺς πολλοὺς ἐξηπατήκασιν, ὡς 
ἀνεστίους μέν τινας καὶ πλάνητας καὶ βαρβάρους 
καὶ οὐδὲ τούτους ἐλευθέρους οἰκιστὰς εὑρομένης,ἷ 
>? > > / \ \ / \ \ ΝΜ 
οὐ δι᾿ εὐσέβειαν δὲ καὶ δικαιοσύνην καὶ τὴν ἄλλην 
ἀρετὴν ἐπὶ τὴν ἁπάντων ἡγεμονίαν σὺν χρόνῳ 
/ > \ > ᾿] / \ 
παρελθούσης, ἀλλὰ δι᾿ αὐτοματισμόν τινα Kal 
τύχην ἄδικον εἰκῆ δωρουμένην τὰ μέγιστα τῶν 
ἀγαθῶν τοῖς ἀνεπιτηδειοτάτοις: καὶ οἵ γε κα- 
A > ~ 4 
κοηθέστεροι κατηγορεῖν εἰώθασι τῆς τύχης κατὰ 
τὸ φανερὸν ὡς βαρβάρων τοῖς πονηροτάτοις τὰ 
~ € / / 2 > θ / / 3 / 
τῶν “EXAjvwv χαριζομένης 5 ἀγαθά. καίτοι 3 τί 
δεῖ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων λέγειν, ὅπου γε καὶ τῶν 
> - 
συγγραφέων τινὲς ἐτόλμησαν ἐν ταῖς ἱστορίαις 
ταῦτα γράψαντες καταλιπεῖν, βασιλεῦσι βαρβάροις 
i 2 ΄ 
μισοῦσι τὴν ἡγεμονίαν, οἷς δουλεύοντες αὐτοὶ καὶ 
3 > ὶ ΔῈ ‘ ¢ ~ / » , 
τὰ καθ᾽ ἡδονὰς ὁμιλοῦντες διετέλεσαν, οὔτε δικαίας 
΄- / 
οὔτε ἀληθεῖς ἱστορίας χαριζόμενοι; 
1 εὑρομένης Sauppe, παρεχομένης Steph.*, κεκτημένης or 
δεχομένης Reiske : εὐχομένης AB, Jacoby. 


2 Schwartz: ποριζομένης Ο, Jacoby. 
8 καίτοι Capps: καὶ O, Jacoby. 





1Sylburg suggested that Hieronymus and Timaeus 
(see beginning of chap. 6) were among the writers 


14 


BOOK 1. 4, 1-3 


since her overthrow of the Macedonian powers 
and her success in the Punic wars, that she arrived 
at distinction and glory, nevertheless, when I was at 
liberty to choose one of the famous periods in her 
history for my theme, I turned aside to one so 
barren of distinction as her antiquarian lore. For 
to this day almost all the Greeks are ignorant of 
the early history of Rome and the great majority 
of them have been imposed upon by sundry false 
opinions grounded upon stories which chance has 
brought to their ears and led to believe that, having 
come upon various vagabonds without house or 
home and barbarians, and even those not free men, 
as her founders, she in the course of time arrived at 
world domination, and this not through reverence 
for the gods and justice and every other virtue, but 
through some chance and the injustice of Fortune, 
which inconsiderately showers her greatest favours 
upon the most undeserving. And indeed the more 
malicious are wont to rail openly at Fortune for 
freely bestowing on the basest of barbarians the 
blessings of the Greeks. And yet why should I 
mention men at large, when even some historians 
have dared to express such views in the writings 
they have left, taking this method of humouring 
barbarian kings who detested Rome’s supremacy,— 
princes to whom they were ever servilely devoted 
and with whom they associated as flatterers,—by 
presenting them with “histories” which were neither 
just nor true 7} 


Dionysius here had in mind and that Pyrrhus was one of 
the kings. 


15 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


V. Ταύτας δὴ τὰς πεπλανημένας, ὥσπερ ἔφην, 
ὑπολήψεις ἐξελέσθαι τῆς διανοίας τῶν πολλῶν 
προαιρούμενος καὶ ἀντικατασκευάσαι τὰς ἀληθεῖς, 
περὶ μὲν τῶν οἰκισάντων τὴν πόλιν, οἵτινες ἦσαν 
καὶ κατὰ τίνας ἕκαστοι καιροὺς συνῆλθον καὶ τίσι 
τύχαις χρησάμενοι τὰς πατρίους οἰκήσεις ἐξέλιπον, 
ἐν ταύτῃ δηλώσω τῇ γραφῇ, δι᾿ ἧς “Ελληνάς τε 
αὐτοὺς ὄντας ἐπιδείξειν ὑπισχνοῦμαι καὶ οὐκ ἐκ 
τῶν ἐλαχίστων ἢ φαυλοτάτων ἐθνῶν συνεληλυθότας. 
περὶ δὲ τῶν πράξεων, ἃς μετὰ τὸν οἰκισμὸν εὐθέως 
ἀπεδείξαντο, καὶ περὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων, ἐξ ὧν 
εἰς τοσαύτην ἡγεμονίαν προῆλθον οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτούς, 
ἀπὸ τῆς μετὰ ταύτην ἀρξάμενος ἀναγραφῆς ἀφη- 
γήσομαι, παραλιπὼν οὐδὲν ὅση μοι δύναμις τῶν 
ἀξίων ἱστορίας, ἵνα τοῖς γεΞ μαθοῦσι τὴν ἀλήθειαν 
ἃ προσήκει περὶ τῆς πόλεως τῆσδε παραστῇ 
φρονεῖν, εἰ μὴ παντάπασιν ἀγρίως καὶ δυσμενῶς 
διάκεινται πρὸς αὐτήν, καὶ μήτε ἄχθεσθαι τῇ 
ὑποτάξει κατὰ τὸ εἰκὸς γενομένῃ (φύσεως γὰρ δὴ 
νόμος ἅπασι κοινός, ὃν οὐδεὶς καταλύσει χρόνος, 
ἄρχειν ἀεὶ τῶν ἡττόνων τοὺς κρείττονας) μήτε 
κατηγορεῖν τῆς τύχης, ὡς οὐκ ἐπιτηδείῳ πόλει 
τηλικαύτην ἡγεμονίαν καὶ τοσοῦτον ἤδη χρόνον 
προῖκα δωρησαμένης: μαθοῦσί ye δὴ παρὰ τῆς 
ἱστορίας, ὅτι μυρίας ἤνεγκεν ἀνδρῶν ἀρετὰς εὐθὺς 
ἐξ ἀρχῆς μετὰ τὸν οἰκισμόν, ὧν οὔτ᾽ εὐσεβεστέρους 
οὔτε δικαιοτέρους οὔτε σωφροσύνῃ πλείονι παρὰ 

1 πολλῶν Β : πολιτῶν Re 


16 


BOOK I. 5, 1-3 


V. In order, therefore, to remove these errone- 
ous impressions, as I have called them, from the 
minds of the many and to substitue true ones in their 
room, I shall in this Book show who the founders 
of the city were, at what periods the various groups 
came together, and through what turns of fortune 
they left their native countries. By this means I 
engage to prove that they were Greeks and came 
together from nations not the smallest nor the least 
considerable. And beginning with the next Book 
I shall tell of the deeds they performed immediately 
after their founding of the city and of the customs 
and institutions by virtue of which their descendants 
advanced to so great dominion; and, so far as I am 
able, I shall omit nothing worthy of being recorded 
in history, to the end that I may instil in the minds 
of those who shall then be informed of the truth the 
fitting conception of this city,—unless they have 
already assumed an utterly violent and hostile 
attitude toward it,—and also that they may neither 
feel indignation at their present subjection, which is 
grounded on reason (for by an universal law of Na- 
ture, which time cannot destroy, it is ordained that 
superiors shall ever govern their inferiors), nor rail at 
Fortune for having wantonly bestowed upon an un- 
deserving city a supremacy so great and already of 
so long continuance, particularly when they shall 
have learned from my history that Rome from the 
very beginning, immediately after its founding, 
produced infinite examples of virtue in men whose 
superiors, whether for piety or for justice or for 





2 τοῖς ye Ritschl, τοῖς Kiessling: τότε O. 


17 
VOL. I. ς 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


, 4 / , 5 s Ἁ ,ὔ 
πάντα τὸν βίον χρησαμένους οὐδέ γε τὰ πολέμια 
κρείττους ἀγωνιστὰς οὐδεμία πόλις ἤνεγκεν οὔτε 
“Ελλὰς οὔτε βάρβαρος, εἰ δὴ ἀ ἀπέσται τοῦ λόγου τὸ 
ἐπίφθονον" ἔχει γάρ τι καὶ τοιοῦτον ἡ τῶν παρα- 
δόξων καὶ θαυμαστῶν ὑπόσχεσις. οἱ δὲ σύμπαν- 
τες οἱ τοσοῦτο περιθέντες αὐτῇ δυναστείας μέγεθος 
ἀγνοοῦνται πρὸς “Ελλήνων, οὐ τυχόντες ἀξιολόγου 
συγγραφέως - οὐδεμία γὰρ ἀκριβὴς ἐξελήλυθε περὶ 

> ~ e \ ¢ / ~ ~ 
αὐτῶν “EXAnvis ἱστορία μέχρι τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς χρό- 

“ \ >? ~ 
νων, ὅτι μὴ κεφαλαιώδεις ἐπιτομαὶ πάνυ βραχεῖαι, 
7 > Q “. 

VI. πρώτου μέν, ὅσα κἀμὲ εἰδέναι, τὴν ‘Popai- 

\ > / > ~ 
κὴν ἀρχαιολογίαν ἐπιδραμόντος “Ἰερωνύμου τοῦ 
Καρδιανοῦ συγγραφέως ἐ ἐν τῇ περὶ τῶν ᾿Επιγόνων 
πραγματείᾳ" ἔπειτα Τιμαίου τοῦ Σικελιώτου τὰ 
μὲν ἀρχαῖα τῶν ἱστοριῶν ἐν ταῖς κοιναῖς ἱστορίαις 
> / A A \ P. κ᾿ > 7 
ἀφηγησαμένου, τοὺς δὲ πρὸς Ilvppov τὸν ᾿Ηπειρώτην 

> QO 7 
πολέμους εἰς ἰδίαν καταχωρίσαντος πραγματείαν" 
Ὁ \ / > / \ / ‘ 
ἅμα δὲ τούτοις ‘Avtiydvov te καὶ Πολυβίου καὶ 
~ / A A 
Σιληνοῦ καὶ μυρίων ἄλλων τοῖς αὐτοῖς πράγμασιν 
/ > - εἰ 
οὐχ ὁμοίως ἐπιβαλόντων, ὧν ἕκαστος ὀλίγα καὶ 
>) \ > ~ ᾿ ~ / > 3 > ~ 
οὐδὲ ἀκριβῶς αὐτῷ διεσπουδασμένα, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τῶν 
> 
ἐπιτυχόντων ἀκουσμάτων συνθεὶς ἀνέγραψεν. ὁμοί- 
\ / \ > \ / > / « 
ας δὲ τούτοις καὶ οὐδὲν διαφόρους ἐξέδωκαν ἕστο- 
¢ ~ 
plas καὶ Ρωμαίων ὅσοι τὰ παλαιὰ ἔργα τῆς πό- 
λεως ᾿Ελληνικῇ διαλέκτῳ συνέγραψαν, ὧν εἰσι πρε- 





1 Hieronymus wrote a history of the Diadochi (the im- 
mediate successors of Alexander) and of their sons, some- 
times called the Epigoni (cf. Diodorus i. 3), covering the 
period down to the war of Pyrrhus in Italy. 

2Timaeus’ great work was his history of Sicily down to 
the overthrow of Agathocles in 289. It included the 


18 


BOOK I. 5, 3-6, 2 


life-long self-control or for warlike valour, no city, 
either Greek or barbarian, has ever produced. This, 
I say, is what I hope to accomplish, if my readers will 
but lay aside all resentment ; for some such feeling 
is aroused by a promise of things which run counter 
to received opinion or excite wonder. And it is a 
fact that all those Romans who bestowed upon their 
country so great a dominion are unknown to the 
Greeks for want of a competent historian. For no 
accurate history of the Romans written in the Greek 
language has hitherto appeared, but only very brief 
and summary epitomes. 

VI. The first historian, so far as | am aware, to 
touch upon the early period of the Romans was 
Hieronymus of Cardia, in his work on the Epigoni.? 
After him Timaeus of Sicily related the beginnings 
of their history in his general history and treated 
in a separate work the wars with Pyrrhus of Epirus.? 
Besides these, Antigonus, Polybius, Silenus 3 and in- 
numerable other authors devoted themselves to the 
same themes, though in different ways, each of them 
recording some few things compiled without accurate 
investigation on his own part but from reports which 
chance had brought to his ears. Like to these in 
all respects are the histories of those Romans, also, 
who related in Greek the early achievements of the 


histories of Italy and Carthage ; hence Dionysius describes 
it as a “general history.” 

3 Antigonus, cited by Plutarch on early Roman history, 
is otherwise unknown. Polybius is too well known to 
require comment here. Silenus was one of the historians 
in the suite of Hannibal; his history of the Second Punic 
War was praised by Cicero and Nepos. 


19 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


σβύτατοι Κόιντός te Φάβιος καὶ Λεύκιος Κίγκιος, 
ἀμφότεροι κατὰ τοὺς Φοινικικοὺς ἀκμάσαντες πολέ- 
μους. τούτων δὲ τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἑκάτερος, οἷς μὲν 
αὐτὸς ἔργοις παρεγένετο, διὰ τὴν ἐμπειρίαν ἀκρι- 
βῶς ἀνέγραψε, τὰ δὲ ἀρχαῖα τὰ μετὰ τὴν κτίσιν 
τῆς πόλεως γενόμενα κεφαλαιωδῶς ἐπέδραμεν. 
διὰ ταύτας μὲν δὴ τὰς αἰτίας ἔδοξέ μοι μὴ παρ- 
ελθεῖν καλὴν ἱστορίαν ἐγκαταλειφθεῖσαν ὑπὸ τῶν 
πρεσβυτέρων ἀμνημόνευτον, ἐξ ἧς ἀκριβῶς γρα- 
φείσης συμβήσεται τὰ κράτιστα καὶ δικαιότατα 
τῶν ἔργων: τοῖς μὲν ἐκπεπληρωκόσι τὴν ἑαυτῶν 
μοῖραν ἀνδράσιν ἀγαθοῖς δόξης αἰωνίου τυχεῖν καὶ 
πρὸς τῶν ἐπιγιγνομένων ἐπαινεῖσθαι, ἃ ποιεῖ τὴν 
θνητὴν φύσιν ὁμοιοῦσθαι τῇ θείᾳ καὶ μὴ συναπο- 
θνήσκειν Ta} ἔργα τοῖς σώμασι: τοῖς δὲ ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνων 
τῶν ἰσοθέων ἀνδρῶν νῦν τε οὖσ! καὶ ὕστερον ἐσομέ- 
νοις μὴ τὸν ἥδιστόν τε καὶ ῥᾷστον αἱρεῖσθαι τῶν 
βίων, ἀλλὰ τὸν εὐγενέστατον καὶ φιλοτιμότατον, 
ἐνθυμουμένους ὅτι τοὺς εἰληφότας καλὰς τὰς πρώ- 
τας ἐκ τοῦ γένους ἀφορμὰς μέγα ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς 
προσήκει φρονεῖν καὶ μηδὲν ἀνάξιον ἐπιτηδεύειν 
τῶν προγόνων * ἐμοὶ δέ, ὃς οὐχὶ κολακείας χάριν 
ἐπὶ ταύτην ἀπέκλινα τὴν πραγματείαν, ἀλλὰ τῆς 
ἀληθείας καὶ τοῦ δικαίου προνοούμενος, ὧν δεῖ 
στοχάζεσθαι πᾶσαν ἱστορίαν, πρῶτον μὲν ἀπο- 
δείξασθαι" τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ διάνοιαν, ὅτι χρηστὴ πρὸς 
ἅπαντάς 3 ἐστι τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς καὶ φιλοθεώρους τῶν 
1 τὰ Β: αὐτῆς τὰ A, αὐτοῖς τὰ R. 


2Ritschl: ἐπιδείξασθαι Ο, Jacoby. 


ὃ ἅπαντας B: ἅπαντας ἀνθρώπους R. 


20 


BOOK 1. 6, 2-5 


city; the oldest of these writers are Quintus Fabius ὦ 
and Lucius Cincius.* who both flourished during the 
Punic wars. Each of these men related the events 
at which he himself had been present with great 
exactness, as being well acquainted with them, but 
touched only in a summary way upon the early 
events that followed the founding of the city. For 
these reasons, therefore, I have determined not to 
pass over a noble period of history which the older 
writers left untouched, a period, moreover, the ac- 
curate portrayal of which will lead to the following 
most excellent and just results: In the first place, 
the brave men who have fulfilled their destiny will 
gain immortal glory and be extolled by posterity, 
which things render human nature like unto the 
divine and prevent men’s deeds from perishing to- 
gether with their bodies. And again, both the 
present and future descendants of those godlike men 
will choose, not the pleasantest and easiest of lives, 
but rather the noblest and most ambitious, when 
they consider that all who are sprung from an illus- 
trious origin ought to set a high value on themselves 
and indulge in no pursuit unworthy of their an- 
eestors. And I, who have not turned aside to this 
work for the sake of flattery, but out of a regard for 
truth and justice, which ought to be the aim of every 
history, shall have an opportunity, in the first place, 
of expressing my attitude of goodwill toward all 
good men and toward all who take pleasure in the 


1Q. Fabius Pictor. 
2 L. Cincius Alimentus. 


21 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


καλῶν ἔργων καὶ μεγάλων: ἔπειτα χαριστηρίους 
ἀμοιβάς, ἃς ἐμοὶ δύναμις ἦν, ἀποδοῦναι τῇ πόλει, 
παιδείας τε μεμνημένῳ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀγαθῶν 
ὅσων ἀπέλαυσα διατρίψας ἐν αὐτῇ. 

VII. Azodcdwxas δὲ τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς προαιρέσεως 
λόγον ἔτι βούλομαι καὶ περὶ τῶν ἀφορμῶν εἰπεῖν, 
αἷς ἐχρησάμην ὅτ᾽ ἔμελλον ἐπιχειρεῖν τῇ γραφῇ: 
ἴσως γὰρ οἱ προανεγνωκότες “Ἰερώνυμον ἢ ἢ Τίμαιον 
ἢ Πολύβιον ἢ τῶν ἄλλων τινὰ συγγραφέων, ὑπὲρ 
ὧν ἐποιησάμην λόγον ὀλίγῳ πρότερον ὡς ἐπι- 
σεσυρκότων τὴν γραφήν, πολλὰ τῶν ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ 
γραφομένων οὐχ εὑρηκότες παρ᾽ ἐκείνοις κείμενα 
σχεδιάζειν ὑπολήψονταί με καὶ πόθεν ἡ τούτων 
γνῶσις εἰς ἐμὲ παραγέγονεν ἀξιώσουσι μαθεῖν. 
ἵνα δὴ μὴ τοιαύτη δόξα παραστῇ τισι περὶ ἐμοῦ, 
βέλτιον ἀφ᾽ ὧν ὡρμήθην λόγων τε καὶ ὑπομνη- 
ματισμῶν προειπεῖν. ἐγὼ καταπλεύσας εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν 
ἅμα τῷ καταλυθῆναι τὸν ἐμφύλιον πόλεμον ὑπὸ τοῦ 
Σεβαστοῦ Καίσαρος ἑβδόμης καὶ ὀγδοηκοστῆς καὶ 
ἑκατοστῆς ὀλυμπιάδος μεσούσης, καὶ τὸν ἐξ ἐκείνου 
χρόνον ἐτῶν δύο καὶ εἴκοσι μέχρι τοῦ παρόντος 
γενόμενον ἐν “Ρώμῃ διατρίψας, διάλεκτόν τε τὴν 
“Ῥωμαϊκὴν ἐκμαθὼν καὶ γραμμάτων τῶν" ἐπι- 
χωρίων λαβὼν ἐπιστήμην, ἐν παντὶ τούτῳ τῷ 5 
χρόνῳ τὰ συντείνοντα πρὸς τὴν ὑπόθεσιν ταύτην 
διετέλουν πραγματευόμενος. καὶ τὰ μὲν παρὰ τῶν 
λογιωτάτων ἀνδρῶν, οἷς εἰς ὁμιλίαν ἦλθον, διδαχῇ 
παραλαβών, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἱστοριῶν ἀναλεξάμενος, 


1 τῶν added by Reiske. 27@ added by Ritschl. 
22 


BOOK I. 6. 5-7, 3 


contemplation of great and noble deeds; and, 
the second place, of making the most i catia 
return that I may to the city in remembrance of the 
education and other blessings I have enjoyed during 
my residence in it. 

VII. Having thus given the reason for my choice 
of subject, I wish now to say something concern- 
ing the sources I used while preparing for my task. 
For it is possible that those who have already read 
Hieronymus, Timaeus, Polybius, or any of the other 
historians whom I just now mentioned as having 
slurred over their work,since they will not have found 
in those authors many things mentioned by me, will 
suspect me of inventing them and will demand to 
know how I came by the knowledge of these par- 
ticulars. Lest anyone, therefore, should entertain 
such an opinion of me, it is best that I should state 
in advance what narratives and records I have used 
as sources. [I arrived in Italy at the very time that 
Augustus Caesar put an end to the civil war, in the 
middle of the one hundred and eighty-seventh 
Olympiad!; and having from that time to this 
present day, a period of twenty-two years, lived 
at Rome, learned the language of the Romans and 
acquainted myself with their writings, I have de- 
voted myself during all that time to matters bear- 
ing upon my subject. Some information I re- 
ceived orally from men of the greatest learning, with 
whom I associated: and the rest I gathered from 


1 Perhaps late in 30 B.c., if Dionysius wrote this preface 
early in the year 7 (chap. 3, 4); but the closing of the 
temple of Janus in January, 29, or Octavian’s triumph in 
August may have marked for him the end of the war. 


23 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


a ε ‘ 9 ~ > / e / td 
ἃς of πρὸς αὐτῶν ἐπαινούμενοι “Ῥωμαίων συνέ- 
4 
γραψαν ΠΙόρκιός te Κάτων καὶ Φάβιος Μάξιμος 
> \ 
καὶ Οὐαλέριος 61 Avtieds καὶ Λικίννιος 53 Μάκερ 
Αἴλιοί τε καὶ Γέλλιοι καὶ Καλπούρνιοι καὶ ἕτεροι 
\ A / Μ > > ~ > >; 2 ‘ 
συχνοὶ πρὸς τούτοις ἄνδρες οὐκ ἀφανεῖς, ἀπ᾽ ἐκεί- 
νων ὁρμώμενος τῶν πραγματειῶν (εἰσὶ δὲ ταῖς 
ς - ΄ > A / 5 ,ὕ 
Ελληνικαῖς χρονογραφίαις ἐοικυῖΐαι), τότε ἐπεχεί- 
΄ - ~ A = ¢ \ > - 
ρῆσα τῇ γραφῇ. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὑπὲρ ἐμαυτοῦ 
> > \ A ~ 
διείλεγμαι. λοιπὸν δ᾽ eE7L* μοι καὶ περὶ τῆς 
~ ~ / \ 
ἱστορίας αὐτῆς προειπεῖν, τίσι τε αὐτὴν περιλαμ- 
\ / ~ 
βάνω χρόνοις Kal περὶ τίνων ποιοῦμαι πραγμάτων 
‘4 > , A ~ ~ 
τὴν διήγησιν καὶ ποταπὸν ἀποδίδωμι TO σχῆμα TH 
/ 
πραγματείᾳ. 
τ x \ > ~ ¢€ / > A 
VILL. Ἄρχομαι μὲν οὖν τῆς ἱστορίας amo τῶν 
a ς - 
παλαιοτάτων μύθων, ots παρέλιπον ot πρὸ ἐμοῦ 
- \ 2» ΝΜ 
γενόμενοι συγγραφεῖς χαλεποὺς ὄντας ἄνευ πραγ- 
> ~ / 
ματείας μεγάλης ἐξευρεθῆναι " καταβιβάζω δὲ τὴν 
ῃ > κι a 7, a 
διήγησιν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν τοῦ πρώτου Φοινικικοῦ 
> ~ / τ 
πολέμου τὴν γενομένην ἐνιαυτῷ τρίτῳ τῆς ὀγδόης 
~ - ς > / 

Kal εἰκοστῆς ἐπὶ ταῖς ἑκατὸν ὀλυμπιάσιν. ἀφη- 
“κι: 3 / “ / 
γοῦμαι δὲ τοὺς τε ὀθνείους πολέμους τῆς πόλεως 

~ > 
ἅπαντας ὅσους * ἐν ἐκείνοις τοῖς χρόνοις ἐπολέμησε, 
\ \ > / 7 a, te > ͵ 9 
καὶ τὰς ἐμφυλίους στάσεις ὁπόσας ἐστασίασεν, ἐξ 
16 added by Biicheler. 
2 λικίννιος O (and so nearly always): Δικίνιος Jacoby (here 
only). 


8 δ᾽ ἔτι Cary: ἔτι δέ B, Jacoby, ἐστι δέ R; δέ Pflugk. 
ὁ ὅσους Kriger: οὗς O. 


24 


BOOK I. 7, 3-8, 2 


histories written by the approved Roman authors— 
Porcius Uato, Fabius Maximus,! Valerius Antias, 
Licinius Macer, the Aelii, Gellii and Calpurnii,? and 
many others of note; with these works, which are 
like the Greek annalistic accounts, as a basis, I set 
about the writing of my history. So much, then, 
concerning myself. But it yet remains for me to 
say something also concerning the history itself—to 
what periods I limit it, what subjects I describe, 
and what form I give to the work. 

VILL. I begin my history, then, with the most 
ancient legends, which the historians before me have 
omitted as a subject difficult to be cleared up with- 
out diligent study ; and | bring the narrative down 
to the beginning of the First Punic War, which fell 
in the third year of the one hundred and twenty- 
eighth Olympiad.? I relate all the foreign wars 
that the city waged during that period and all 
the internal seditions with which she was agitated, 


1 Probably Q. Fabius Maximus Servilianus (cos. 142); 
but we have very little evidence to go on. See Schanz- 
Hosius, Rom. Litteraturgesch. i. p. 174. 

2As Niebuhr pointed out (Rdm. Gesch. ii. note 11), 
these plurals are not to be taken literally, but in the sense 
of ‘‘ men like Aelius,”’ ete. We read of two Aelii, it is true, 
who were engaged in writing history—L. Aelius Tubero, 
a boyhood friend of Cicero, and his son, Quintus; but it 
is doubtful whether the father ever published his work, 
whereas the son’s history is quoted several times. The 
only Gellius and the only Calpurnius known to have been 
historians were Cn. Gellius and L. Calpurnius Piso Frugi, 
sometimes styled Censorius (the ex-censor). Both lived in 
the time of the Gracchi and both wrote histories of Rome 
from the beginning down to their own day. 

3 265 B.c., the date of the casus beili. 


25 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


σ > ~ > / \ > ΄ / A 
οἵων αἰτιῶν ἐγένοντο καὶ δι᾿ οἵων τρόπων τε Kal 
/ / ~ 
λόγων κατελύθησαν - πολιτειῶν τε ἰδέας διέξειμι 
/ 4 J ’ 
πάσας ὅσαις ἐχρήσατο βασιλευομένη τε καὶ μετὰ 
\ / ~ > A 
τὴν κατάλυσιν τῶν μονάρχων, Kal Tis ἦν αὐτῶν 
ε / e / 
ἑκάστης ὃ κόσμος" ἔθη TE TA κράτιστα καὶ νόμους 
A 9 ~ 
τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους διηγοῦμαι καὶ συλλήβδην ὅλον 
> / \ - ~ ~ 
ἀποδείκνυμι TOV ἀρχαῖον βίον THs πόλεως. σχῆμα 
\ > 4> - - « 
δὲ ἀποδίδωμι τῇ πραγματείᾳ οὔθ᾽ ὁποῖον οἱ τοὺς 
λ / / 1 > / > ὃ ὃ 4 - 
πολέμους μόνους ῖ ἀναγράψαντες ἀποδεδώκασι ταῖς 
«ς / ΜΩ39 e ~ ¢ A / 9 A 27? 
ἱστορίαις οὔθ᾽ ὅποῖον ot τὰς πολιτείας αὐτὰς ἐφ 
ς ~ / 7 ~ A 
ἑαυτῶν διηγησάμενοι οὔτε ταῖς χρονικαῖς παρα- 
/ 3) > / ε A > / 
πλήσιον, as ἐξέδωκαν ot τὰς ArUidas πραγματευ- 
σάμενοι: μονοειδεῖς τε γὰρ ἐκεῖναι 5 καὶ ταχὺ 
/ ~ > /, > > > ¢ / 
προσιστάμεναι τοῖς ἀκούουσιν: ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἁπάσης 
> \ > / ‘ ~ ‘ 
ἰδέας μικτὸν evaywviov τε Kal θεωρητικῆς Kat 
διηγηματικῆς,3 ἵνα καὶ τοῖς περὶ τοὺς πολιτικοὺς 
/ / \ a \ \ / 
διατρίβουσι λόγους καὶ τοῖς περὶ τὴν φιλόσοφον 
Ψ / / \ wv > /, / 
ἐσπουδακόσι θεωρίαν καὶ εἴ τισιν ἀοχλήτου δεήσει 
~ - > 
διαγωγῆς ἐν ἱστορικοῖς ἀναγνώσμασιν ἀποχρώντως 
/ ε - ς / \ / 
ἔχουσα φαίνηται. ἡ μὲν οὖν ἱστορία περὶ τοιούτων 
/ / 

TE γενήσεται πραγμάτων καὶ τοιούτου τεύξεται 
/ « \ / SFL / / > 
σχήματος: ὁ δὲ συντάξας αὐτὴν Διονύσιός εἰμι 

e / - / 
AdeEavipov AXrtkapvacevs* ἄρχομαι δ᾽ ἐνθένδε. 
1 μόνους added by Steph.’. 
27e yap ἐκεῖναι Pflugk: yap ἐκεῖναί te O, Jacoby; yap 
ἐκεῖναί ye Reiske. 
3 καὶ διηγηματικῆς added by Cary, καὶ ἡδείας by Steph.?, 
Jacoby. 


26 


BOOK I. 8, 2-4 


showing from what causes they sprang and by what 
methods and by what arguments they were brought 
to anend. I give an account also of all the forms of 
government Rome used, both during the monarchy 
and after its overthrow, and show what was the 
character of each. I describe the best customs and 
the most remarkable laws; and,in short, I show the 
whole life of the ancient Romans. As to the form 
I give this work. it does not resemble that which the 
authors who make wars alone their subject have 
given to their histories, nor that which others who 
treat of the several forms of government by them- 
selves have adopted, nor is it like the annalistic 
accounts which the authors of the Atthides! have 
published (for these are monotonous and soon grow 
tedious to the reader), but it is a combination of 
every kind, forensic, speculative and narrative, 
to the intent that it may afford satisfaction both 
to those who occupy themselves with political de- 
bates and to those who are devoted to philosophical 
speculations,” as well as to any who may desire mere 
undisturbed entertainment in their reading of history. 
Such things, therefore, will be the subjects of my 
history and such will beitsform. I, the author, am 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, the son of Alexander. 
And at this point 1 begin. 


1 Atthis (an adjective meaning ‘‘ Attic ᾽᾽) was the name 
given to histories of Attica; there were many of these 
written in the fourth and third centuries. They made no 
pretension to literary style. 

* A comparison of the introductory chapter of Book XI 
(§§ 1 and 4) makes it probable that the first group men- 
tioned here were those who took an active part in public 
affairs, the sccond the political philosophers or theorists. 


27 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ ε ~ 
IX. Τὴν ἡγεμόνα γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης ἁπάσης 
πόλιν, ἣν νῦν κατοικοῦσι ᾿ ωμαῖοι, παλαιότατοι 
τῶν μνημονευομένων λέγονται κατασχεῖν βάρβαροι 
ἘΝ λ / “8 30 / 5 τ δὲ \ 7 ΩΣ» 
ἱκελοί, ἔθνος αὐθιγενές" τὰ δὲ πρὸ τούτων οὐθ 
ὡς κατείχετο πρὸς ἑτέρων οὔθ᾽ ὡς ἔρημος ἦν 
>) A ” / >, - / \ ΄“ 
οὐδεὶς ἔχει βεβαίως εἰπεῖν. χρόνῳ δὲ ὕστερον 
39 - > \ / / - 
Αβοριγῖνες αὐτὴν παραλαμβάνουσι πολέμῳ μακρῷ 
τοὺς ἔχοντας ἀφελόμενοι - ot τὸ μὲν πρότερον 
ἐπὶ τοῖς ὄρεσιν ᾧκουν ἄνευ τειχῶν κωμηδὸν καὶ 
σποράδες, ἐπεὶ δὲ ΠΠ]ελασγοί τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
3 ~ ~ 
“Ελλήνων τινὲς ἀναμιχθέντες αὐτοῖς συνήραντο τοῦ 
\ 
πρὸς τοὺς ὁμοτέρμονας πολέμου, τὸ δΣικελικὸν 
΄ ΄ / 
γένος ἀπαναστήσαντες ἐξ αὐτῆς πόλεις περιεβά- 
λοντο συχνὰς καὶ παρεσκεύασαν ὑπήκοον αὑτοῖς 
γενέσθαι πᾶσαν ὅσην ὁρίζουσι ποταμοὶ δύο Aipis 
A £— 1 a \ \ > Ἁ Xr / ~ 
καὶ TéPepis:! of τὰς μὲν ἀρχὰς λαμβάνουσι τῆς 
- ~ ΒΥ πὸ 
ῥύσεως ἐκ τῆς ὑπωρείας τῶν Ἀπεννίνων ὀρῶν, 
o 7 ~ > ~ « > 
ὑφ᾽ ὧν δίχα τέμνεται πᾶσα ἐπὶ μῆκος ἡ “IraXia, 
> / 
διαστάντες δὲ κατὰ Tas ἐκβολὰς ὀκτακόσιά που 
7 » > 5 / > \ \ 3 / 
στάδια am ἀλλήλων εἰς τὸ Τυρρηνικὸν ἐξερεύ- 
> ~ / ~ ε 
γονται πέλαγος, ἀπὸ μὲν τῶν βορείων μερῶν o 
> : / > ‘ 
TéBepis "Qatias πόλεως πλησίον ἐκδιδούς, ἀπὸ δὲ 
~ ~ / - / 
τοῦ μεσημβρινοῦ κλίματος ὁ Apis υιντουρναν 
€ / > c ΄ 
παραμειβόμενος: “Ρωμαίων δέ εἰσιν αἱ πόλεις 
pee ~ ~ 
ἀμφότεραι ἄποικοι. Kal διέμειναν ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς 
\ ε > > 
οἰκήσεως οὐκέτι πρὸς ἑτέρων ἐξελαθέντες, ὀνομάτων 
ἀλλαγαῖς" διτταῖς" οἱ αὐτοὶ ἄνθρωποι προσαγορευό- 
/ ΄ ~ A > ͵ὔ 
μενοι, μέχρι μὲν τοῦ Τρωικοῦ πολέμου τὴν ἀρχαίαν 


1 Τέβερις Ritschl: τίβερις Ο (and so just below; but in 
later passages τέβερις is the more common form), 


28 


BOOK 1. 9, 1-3 


IX. This city, mistress of the whole earth and sea. 
which the Romans now inhabit, is said to have had 
as its earliest known occupants the barbarian Sicels, a 
native race. As to the condition of the place before 
their time, whether it was occupied by others or un- 
inhabited, none can certainly say. But some time 
later the Aborigines gained possession of it, having 
taken it from the occupants after along war. These 
people had previously lived on the mountains in 
unwalled villages and scattered groups; but when 
the Pelasgians,! with whom some other Greeks had 
united, assisted them in the war against their neigh- 
bours, they drove the Sicels out of this place, walled 
in many towns, and contrived to subjugate al! the 
country that lies between the two rivers, the Liris 
and the Tiber. These rivers spring from the foot 
of the Apennine mountains, the range by which all 
Italy is divided into two parts throughout its length, 
and at points about eight hundred stades from one 
another discharge themselves into the Tyrrhenian 
Sea, the Tiber to the north, near the city of Ostia, 
and the Liris to the south, as it flows by Mintur- 
nae, both these cities being Roman colonies. And 
these people remained in this same place of abode, 
being never afterwards driven out by any others; 
but, although they continued to be one and the same 
people,their name was twice changed. Till the time 
of the Trojan war they preserved their ancient name 


1 As will be seen a little later (chap. 17), Dionysius re- 
garded the Pelasgians as a Greek nation. 





3 ἀλλαγαῖς Dmg., Steph.: ἀλλὰ ταῖς O. 
ὃ διτταῖς Kiessling: αὐταῖς O. 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ > / » / »Μ / 9 A A 
τῶν ‘ABopryivwy ὀνομασίαν ἔτι σώζοντες, ἐπὶ δὲ 
/ ,ὔ a A ‘A > \ ,ὔ 
Aarivov βασιλέως, ὃς κατὰ τὸν ᾿Ιλιακὸν πόλεμον 

90. 4 ~ > 7ὔ ~ c 
ἐδυνάστευε, “Λατῖνοι ἀρξάμενοι καλεῖσθαι. “Pw- 
μύλου δὲ τὴν ἐπώνυμον αὑτοῦ πόλιν οἰκίσαντος ἢ 
ἑκκαίδεκα γενεαῖς τῶν Τρωικῶν ὕστερον, ἣν νῦν 
ἔχουσιν ὀνομασίαν μεταλαβόντες, ἔθνος τε μέγιστον 
ἐξ ἐλαχίστου γενέσθαι σὺν χρόνῳ παρεσκεύασαν 
καὶ περιφανέστατον ἐξ ἀδηλοτάτου, τῶν τε δεομέ- 
νων οἰκήσεως παρὰ σφίσι φιλανθρώπῳ ὑποδοχῇ 
καὶ πολιτείας μεταδόσει τοῖς μετὰ τοῦ γενναίου 
ἐν πολέμῳ κρατηθεῖσι, δούλων τε ὅσοι παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς 

~ ~ > / 
ἐλευθερωθεῖεν ἀστοῖς εἶναι συγχωρήσει, τύχης TE 
> / ’ ~ > / A Α ᾿] ~ 
ἀνθρώπων οὐδεμιᾶς εἰ μέλλοι TO κοινὸν ὠφελεῖν 
ἀπαξιώσει: ὑπὲρ ταῦτα δὲ πάντα κόσμῳ τοῦ 
πολιτεύματος, ὃν ἐκ πολλῶν κατεστήσαντο παθη- 
άτων, ἐκ παντὸς καιροῦ λαμβάνοντές τι χρήσιμον. 
= 2 τ € , 

X. Τοὺς δὲ Afopryivas, ad’ ὧν ἄρχει Ρωμαίοις 
A 
τὸ γένος, ot μὲν αὐτόχθονας ᾿Ιταλίας, γένος αὐτὸ 
» [ \ 7, 2 5 / itt αλί δὲ 
καθ᾽ ἕαυτὸ γενόμενον," ἀποφαίνουσιν ᾿Ϊταλίαν δὲ 
καλῶ τὴν ἀκτὴν σύμπασαν, ὅσην ᾿Ϊόνιός τε κόλπος 
» 
καὶ Τυρρηνικὴ θάλασσα καὶ τρίται περιέχουσιν ἐκ 

~ ~ \ / 
γῆς Ἄλπεις. καὶ τὴν ὀνομασίαν αὐτοῖς THY πρώτην 
΄- ~ > » A 
φασὶ τεθῆναι διὰ τὸ γενέσεως τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοὺς 


1Steph.: οἰκήσαντος Ο. 
Ξ γένος. . . γενόμενον deleted by Garrer. 





1 This clause is added, possibly by a scribe, as a defini- 
tion of the well-known Greek word autochthones, here 
rendered ‘‘ natives.’’ The word means literally “ sprung 
from the land itself,’’ corresponding to the Latin indigenae. 


30 


BOOK I. 9, 3-10, 1 


of Aborigines; but under Latinus, their king, who 
reigned at the time of that war, they began to be 
called Latins, and when Romulus founded the 
city named after himself sixteen generations after 
the taking of Troy, they took the name which they 
now bear. And in the course of time they contrived 
to raise themselves from the smallest nation to the 
greatest and from the most obscure to the most 
illustrious, not only by their humane reception of 
those who sought a home among them, but also 
by sharing the rights of citizenship with all who 
had been conquered by them in war after a brave 
resistance, by permitting all the slaves, too, who 
were manumitted among them to become citizens, 
and by disdaining no condition of men from whom 
the commonwealth might reap an advantage, but 
above everything else by their form of government, 
which they fashioned out of their many experiences, 
always extracting something useful from every 
occasion. 

X. There are some who affirm that the Aborigines, 
from whom the Romans are originally descended, 
were natives of Italy, a stock which came into being 
spontaneousuy ὦ (I call Italy all that peninsula which 
is bounded by the Ionian Gulf? and the Tyrrhenian 
Sea and, thirdly, by the Alps on the Jandward side) ; 
and these authors say that they were first called 
Aborigines because they were the founders of the 


It was the proud boast of the Athenians that they were 
autochthones. 

2 “The Ionian Gulf”’ or simply “‘the Ionian”’ is Dionysius’ 
usual term for the Adriatic, or more particularly perhaps 
for the entrance to this sea. 


31 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἄρξαι, ὥσπερ av ἡμεῖς εἴποιμεν yevedpyas ἢ πρωτο- 
γόνους ἕτεροι δὲ λέγουσιν ἀνεστίους τινὰς καὶ 
πλάνητας ἐκ πολλῶν συνελθόντας χωρίων κατὰ 
δαίμονα περιτυχεῖν ἀλλήλοις αὐτόθι καὶ τὴν οἴκησιν 
ἐπὶ τοῖς ἐρύμασι καταστήσασθαι, ζῆν δὲ ἀπὸ λῃστείας 
καὶ νομῆς. παραλλάττουσι δὲ καὶ τὴν ὀνομασίαν 
αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὸ ταῖς τύχαις οἰκειότερον, APeppryivas } 
λέγοντες, ὥστε δηλοῦσθαι αὐτοὺς πλάνητας. κιν- 
δυνεύει δὴ κατὰ τούτους μηδὲν διαφέρειν τὸ τῶν 
᾿ΑΑβοριγίνων φῦλον ὧν ἐκάλουν οἱ παλαιοὶ “ελέγων -3 
τοῖς γὰρ ἀνεστίοις καὶ μιγάσι καὶ μηδεμίαν γῆν 
βεβαίως ὡς πατρίδα κατοικοῦσι ταύτην ἐτίθεντο 3 
τὴν ὀνομασίαν ws τὰ πολλά. ἄλλοι δὲ Λιγύων 
ἀποίκους μυθολογοῦσιν αὐτοὺς γενέσθαι τῶν ὁμο- 
ρούντων ᾿Ομβρικοῖς- οἵ γὰρ Λίγυες οἰκοῦσι μὲν 
καὶ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας πολλαχῇ, νέμονται δέ τινα καὶ τῆς 
Κελτικῆς. ὁποτέρα δ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐστι γῆ πατρίς, 
ἄδηλον οὐ γὰρ ἔτι λέγεται περὶ αὐτῶν προσωτέρω 
σαφὲς οὐδέν. 

ΧΙ. Οἱ δὲ λογιώτατοι τῶν “Ρωμαϊκῶν συγ- 
γραφέων, ἐν οἷς ἐστι ]ΠΠόρκιός τε Κάτων ὁ τὰς 
γενεαλογίας τῶν ἐν ᾿Ιταλίᾳ πόλεων ἐπιμελέστατα 


1’ABeppryivas Steph.: ἀβορριγῖνας B, ἀβοριγίνας A. 
* Λελέγων Dmg., Steph.*: δὴ λέγω O. 
8 Schwartz: επετίθεντο O, Jacoby. 





1“ Founders of families”’’ and “‘first-born’”’ respectively. 

2 From the Latin aberrare (“‘ wander’’). 

3 Strabo cites (vii. 7, 2) some verses of Hesiod in which 
the Leleges are described as λεκτοὺς ἐκ γαίης λαούς, “‘ peoples 
gathered out of earth,’ an etymological word-play which 


32 


BOOK 1. 10, 1-11, 1 


families of their descendants, or, as we should call 
them, genearchai or protogonot.1 Others claim that 
certain vagabonds without house or home, coming 
together out of many places, met one another there 
by chance and took up their abode in the fastnesses, 
living by robbery and grazing their herds. And 
these writers change their name, also, to one more 
suitable to their condition, calling them Aberrigines,? 
to show that they were wanderers ; indeed, accord- 
ing to these, the race of the Aborigines would seem 
to be no different from those the ancients called 
Leleges ; for this is the name they generally gave to 
the homeless and mixed peoples who had no fixed 
abode which they could call their country.’ Still 
others have a story to the effect that they were 
colonists sent out by those Ligurians who are 
neighbours of the Umbrians. For the Ligurians in- 
habit not only many parts of Italy but some parts 
ef Gaul as well, but which of these lands is their 
native country is not known, since nothing certain 
is said of them further. 

XI. But the most learned of the Roman historians, 
among whom is Porcius Cato, who compiled with 
the greatest care the “*‘ origins ”’ * of the Italian cities, 


he thinks shows that Hesiod regarded them as having been 
from the beginning a collection of mixed peoples. This 
derivation of the name from the root λεγ (** gather’’) is 
the only one the ancients have handed down. 

4Cato’s history seems to have consisted at first of one 
book, in which Rome’s beginnings and the regal period were 
recounted, followed by two books devoted to the origin 
of the various Italian cities; hence the title Origines. 
Later he added four more books, in which an account was 
given of the Punic Wars and subsequent events. 


33 


to 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ \ Jes / \ »” / 
συναγαγὼν Kat Iaios Σεμπρώνιος καὶ ἄλλοι ovyvot, 
“Ἐλλ > A > λέ - > > aA \ 

nvas αὐτοὺς εἶναι λέγουσι τῶν ἐν Ἀχαΐᾳ ποτὲ 

οἰκησάντων, πολλαῖς γενεαῖς πρότερον τοῦ πολέμου 

τοῦ Τρωικοῦ μεταναστάντας. οὐκέτι μέντοι διο- 
/ »” ~ « A - ΄- »” 

ρίζουσιν οὔτε φῦλον ᾿λληνικὸν οὗ μετεῖχον, οὔτε 

πόλιν ἐξ ἧς ἀπανέστησαν, οὔτε χρόνον οὐθ᾽ ἡγεμόνα 

~ > > 
τῆς ἀποικίας, οὐθ᾽ ὁποίαις τύχαις χρησάμενοι τὴν 
, 5 / ς A / / 
4 
μητρόπολιν ἀπέλιπον ᾿λληνικῷ τε μύθῳ χρησά- 
>, , ~ \ «ς \ / 

μενοι οὐδένα τῶν τὰ ᾿Ελληνικὰ γραψάντων βε- 

βαιωτὴν παρέσχοντο. τὸ μὲν οὖν ἀληθὲς ὅπως 
> ” ΒΩ > > > A ς / / 

ποτ᾽ ἔχει, ἄδηλον: εἰ δ᾽ ἐστὶν 6 τούτων λόγος 

ὑγιής, οὐκ ἂν ἑτέρου τινὸς εἴησαν ἄποικοι γένους 

ἢ τοῦ καλουμένου νῦν Ἀρκαδικοῦ. πρῶτοι yap 
“EN /, - θ / A is i / 5A 

ἤνων οὗτοι περαιωθέντες τὸν ᾿Ϊόνιον κόλπον 

»” > / Μ >’ \ Οἱ 7 ~ 

ᾧκησαν ᾿Ϊταλίαν, ἄγοντος αὐτοὺς Οἰνώτρου τοῦ 

> 5 = 

Avxdovos: ἦν δὲ πέμπτος ἀπό te Ailewod καὶ 

Φορωνέως τῶν πρώτων ἐν Π]ελοποννήσῳ δυναστεὺ- 
/ Ζ: 

σάντων. Φορωνέως μὲν γὰρ Νιόβη γίνεται" ταύτης 

/ > ~ \ 

δὲ vids καὶ Διός, ws λέγεται, Πελασγός - Αἰζειοῦ δὲ 

εν A / / δὲ 4 4 θ / E > δὲ 

υἱὸς Λυκάων: τούτου δὲ Δηιάνειρα θυγάτηρ. ἐκ δὲ 
~ - ΄ 

Δηιανείρας καὶ ΠΠ]ελασγοῦ “υκάων ἕτερος - τούτου 

- / ~ 

δὲ Οἴνωτρος, ἑπτακαίδεκα γενεαῖς πρότερον τῶν 

¢ \ \ ’ > 

ἐπὶ Τροίαν στρατευσάντων. ὁ μὲν δὴ χρόνος, ἐν 
=> > > / 

ᾧ τὴν ἀποικίαν ἔστειλαν ἽἝλληνες εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν, 
σ᾿ > ~ € / ” > 
οὗτος ἦν. ἀπανέστη δὲ τῆς ᾿ Ελλάδος Οἴνωτρος οὐκ 

~ \ ” ΄ 
ἀρκούμενος τῇ μοίρᾳ: δύο γὰρ καὶ εἴκοσι παίδων 
/ v / 
“Δυκάονι γενομένων εἰς τοσούτους ἔδει κλήρους 
΄ \ \ 
νεμηθῆναι τὴν Αρκάδων χώραν. ταύτης μέν δὴ 
” > ‘ 
τῆς αἰτίας ἕνεκα Πελοπόννησον Οἴνωτρος ἐκλιπὼν 


94 


BOOK I. 11, 1-3 


Gaius Sempronius! and a great many others, say 
that they were Greeks. part of those who once dwelt 
in Achaia, and that they migrated many generations 
before the Trojan war. But they do not go on 
to indicate either the Greek tribe to which they 
belonged or the city from which they removed, or 
the date or the leader of the colony, or as the result 
of what turns o! fortune they left their mother coun- 
try; and although they are following a Greek legend, 
they have cited no Greek historian as their author- 
itv. It is uncertain, therefore. what the truth of 
the matter is. But if what they say is true, the 
Aborigines can be a colony of no other people but of 
these who are now called Arcadians ; for these were 
the first of all the Greeks to cross the Ionian 
Gulf, under the leadership of Oenotrus, the son of 
Lycaon, and to settle in Italy. This Oenocrus was 
the fifth from Aezeius and Phoroneus, who were the 
first kings in the Peloponnesus. For Niobé was 
the daughter of Phoroneus, and Pelasgus was the 
son of Niobé and Zeus, it is said; Lycaon was 
the son of Aezeius, and Deianira was the daughter of 
Lycaon ; Deianira and Pelasgus were the parents 
of another Lycaon, whose son Oenotrus was born 
seventeen generations before the Trojan expedition. 
This. then, was the time when the Greeks sent the 
colony into Italy. Oenotrus left Greece because 
he was dissatisfied with his portion of his father’s 
land; for, as Lycaon had twenty-two sons. it was 
necessary to divide Arcadia into as many shares. 
For this reason Oenotrus left the Pe oponnesus, 


1 0. Sempronius Tuditanus (cos. 129). Besides his liber 
magistratuwum he seems to have written a historical work. 


35 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


‘ , \ § / A 176 1 
και κατασκεύασαμενος ναῦτικον OLALPEL TOV OVLOV 


καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ Πευκέτιος τῶν ἀδελφῶν εἷς. εἵποντο 
δὲ αὐτοῖς τοῦ τε οἰκείου λαοῦ συχνοί, πολυάνθρωπον 
\ \ ἢ, νῷ - / te \ / 
yap δὴ τὸ ἔθνος τοῦτο λέγεται κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς γενέσθαι, 
\ ~ »” « / Ὁ / = > / 
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ᾿ Ελλήνων ὅσοι χώραν εἶχον ἐλάττω 
τῆς ἱκανῆς. [|ευκέτιος μὲν οὖν, ἔνθα τὸ πρῶτον 
΄ ’ 
ὡρμίσαντο τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας, ὑπὲρ ἄκρας ᾿Ϊαπυγίας 
᾿] / \ A > ~ / ‘ > > 
ἐκβιβάσας τὸν λεὼν αὐτοῦ καθιδρύεται, Kal ἀπ 
~ ~ ~ / 
αὐτοῦ οἵ περὶ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία οἰκοῦντες {]ευκέτιοι 
> / wv \ \ / ~ “A 
ἐκλήθησαν. Οἴνωτρος δὲ τὴν πλείω τοῦ στρατοῦ 
μοῖραν ἀγόμενος εἰς τὸν ἕτερον ἀφικνεῖται κόλπον 
~ ~ / 
τὸν ἀπὸ τῶν ἑσπερίων μερῶν παρὰ τὴν ᾿Ϊταλίαν 
ἀναχεύόμενον, ὃς τότε μὲν Αὐσόνιος ἐπὶ τῶν προσ- 
/ » / > / > ‘ \ \ 
οἰκούντων Αὐσόνων ἐλέγετο, ἐπεὶ δὲ Τυρρηνοὶ 
» Δ a ~ 
θαλασσοκράτορες ἐγένοντο, μετέλαβεν 2 ἣν ἔχει νῦν 
/ 
προσηγορίαν. 
XII. Εὑρὼν δὲ χώραν πολλὴν μὲν εἰς νομάς, 
\ \ > 3 / » Ν \ \ 
πολλὴν δὲ εἰς ἀρότους εὔθετον, ἔρημον δὲ τὴν 
πλείστην καὶ οὐδὲ τὴν οἰκουμένην πολυάνθρωπον, 
ἀνακαθήρας τὸ βάρβαρον ἐκ μέρους τινὸς αὐτῆς 
ὦκισε πόλεις μικρὰς καὶ συνεχεῖς ἐπὶ τοῖς ὄρεσιν, 
ὅσπερ ἦν τοῖς παλαιοῖς τρόπος οἰκήσεως συνήθης. 
> A \ “ / ~ \ εν “ 
ἐκαλεῖτο δὲ ἥ τε χώρα πᾶσα πολλὴ οὖσα ὅσην 
κατέσχεν Οἰνωτρία, καὶ ot ἄνθρωποι πάντες ὅσων 
> ” / / > / 
ἦρξεν Οἴνωτροι, τρίτην μεταλαβόντες ὀνομασίαν 
4 es \ \ > ~ / 1 A 
ταύτην. ἐπὶ μὲν yap Αἰζειοῦ βασιλεύοντος Αἰζειοὶ 
2 / / \ / A > \ 
ἐλέγοντο, Λυκάονος δὲ παραλαβόντος τὴν ἀρχὴν 
> 5 Δ / "κα / > 7 > / 
am ἐκείνου αὖθις AvKdoves ὠνομάσθησαν, Οἰνώτρου 


36 


BOOK 1. 11, 3-12, 1 


prepared a fleet, and crossed the Ionian Gulf with 
Peucetius, one of his brothers. They were accom- 
panied by many of their own people—for this nation 
is said to have been very populous in early times— 
and by as many other Greeks as had less land 
than was sufficient for them. Peucetius landed his 
people above the lapygian Promontory, which was the 
first part of Italy they made, and settled there: and 
from him the inhabitants of this region were called 
Peucetians. But Oenotrus with the greater part of 
the expedition came into the other sea that washes 
the western regions along the coast of Italy; it 
was then called the Ausonian Sea, from the Ausonians 
who dwelt beside it, but after the Tyrrhenians be- 
came masters at sea its name was changed to that 
which it now bears. 

XII. And finding there much land suitable for 
pasturage and much for tillage, but for the most 
part unoccupied, and even that which was inhabited 
not thickly populated, he cleared some of it of the 
barbarians and built small towns contiguous to 
one another on the mountains, which was the cus- 
tomary manner of habitation in use among the 
ancients. And all the land he occupied, which was 
very extensive, was called Oenotria, and all the 
people under his command Oenotrians, which was 
the third name they had borne. For in the reign 
of Aezeius they were called Aezeians, when Lycaon 
succeeded to the rule, Lycaonians, and after Oenotrus 


1 ᾿Ιόνιον Kiessling, ᾿Ιόνιον κόλπον Reiske: ἰόνιον πόρον B, 
ἰόνιον πόντον R. 


*Steph.?: μετέβαλεν Ο. 
31 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δὲ / 3 \ > > / ” , 
€ κομίσαντος αὐτοὺς εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν Οἴνωτροι χρόνον 
‘ > r 46 - Q 4 1 - , 
τινὰ ἐκλήθησαν. μαρτυρεῖ δέ po! τῷ λόγῳ 
ΓΟ \ e \ 
Σοφοκλῆς μὲν 6 τραγφῳδοποιὸς ἐν Τριπτολέμῳ 
/ ~ 
δράματι πεποίηται yap αὐτῷ Δημήτηρ διδάσκουσα 
ΑἉ 
τὸν Τριπτόλεμον ὅσην χώραν ἀναγκασθήσεται σπεί- 
ρων τοῖς δοθεῖσιν ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς καρποῖς διεξελθεῖν - 
- A ~ C1” ~ 9 / a > 
μνησθεῖσα δὲ τῆς ἕῴου πρῶτον ᾿Ϊταλίας, ἥ ἐστιν 
9 5 Μ 9 4 / ~ ~ 
az ἄκρας ᾿Ϊαπυγίας μέχρι πορθμοῦ Σικελικοῦ, 
A smh. ~ ~ »” st 2 ¢ / Σ rl 
Kal μετὰ τοῦτο THs ἀντικρυς Σ ἁψαμένη Σικελίας, 
> \ ‘ ς ,ὔ > / > > / \ A 
ἐπὶ τὴν ἑσπέριον ᾿Ιταλίαν αὖθις ἀναστρέφει καὶ τὰ 
~ ; ~ 
μέγιστα τῶν οἰκούντων τὴν παράλιον ταύτην ἐθνῶν 
διεξέρχεται, τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀπὸ τῆς Οἰνώτρων οἰκήσεως 
ποιησαμένη. ἀπόχρη δὲ ταῦτα μόνα λεχθέντα τῶν 
5. te 
ἰαμβείων, ev ois φησι" 
τὰ δ᾽ ἐξόπισθε, χειρὸς εἰς τὰ δεξιά, 
Οἰνωτρία τε πᾶσα καὶ Τυρρηνικὸς 
/ / ~ / 
κόλπος “ιγυστική τε γῆ σε δέξεται. 


\ /, 
᾿Αντίοχος δὲ ὁ Συρακούσιος, συγγραφεὺς πάνυ 
> - > > ’ » ~ A 4 
ἀρχαῖος, ev ᾿Ιταλίας οἰκισμῷ τοὺς παλαιοτάτους 

7 / / . A 
οἰκήτορας διεξιών, ws ἕκαστοί TL μέρος αὐτῆς 
΄ ’ὔ ~ 
κατεῖχον, Οἰνώτρους λέγει πρώτους τῶν μνη- 
~ ΄- > A 4Φ 
μονευομένων ἐν αὐτῇ κατοικῆσαι, εἰπὼν ὧδε" 

\> / 

«Ἀντίοχος Ξενοφάνεος τάδε συνέγραψε περὶ IraXins 
- \ 
ἐκ τῶν ἀρχαίων λόγων τὰ πιστότατα Kal σαφέστατα᾽ 
1 Jacoby: μου O. 
2 Kiessling: ἀντικρὺ O, Jacoby. 


38 


BOOK [f. 12, 1-3 


led them into Italy they were for a while called Oeno- 
trians. What 1 say is supported by the testimony 
of Sophocles. the tragic poet, in his drama entitled 
Triptolemus : for he ‘there represents Demeter as 
informing Triptolemus how large a tract of land he 
would have to trave! over while sowing it with the 
seeds she had given him. For, after first referring 
to the eastern part of Italy, which reaches from 
the Iapygian Promontory to the Sicilian Strait. and 
then touching upon Sicily on the opposite side, 
she returns again to the western part of Italy and 
enumerates the most important nations that in- 
habit this coast. beginning with the set lement of 
the Oenotrians. But it is enough to quote merely 
the 1ambics in which he says: 


“And after this,—first, then, upon the right, 
Oenotria wide-outstretched and Tyrrhene Gulf, 
And next the Ligurian land shall welcome thee.” 


And Antiochus of Syracuse.” a very early historian, 
in his account of the settlement of Italy, when 
enumerating the most ancient ‘nhabitants in the 
order in whch each of them held possession of 
any pa_t of it, says that the first who are reported 
to have inhabited chat country are the Oenotrians. 
His words are these: “ Antiochus, the sen of 
Xenophanes, wrote this account of Italy. which 
comprises al] that is most credible and certain cut of 


1 Nauck, Trag. Graec. Frag.*, p. 262, frg. 541. 

2 Antiochus (latter half of fifth century) wrote a history 
of Sicily and a history of Italy. The former was used by 
Thucydides, and the latter is frequently cited by Strabo. 
The quotation here given is frg. 3 in Muller, Frag. Hist. 
Graec.i. p. 181. 


39 


2 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


A ~ / -“ ~ gf. / 1 A ~ , \ 
τὴν γῆν ταύτην, ἥτις νῦν ᾿ΪΙταλίη! καλεῖται, τὸ 
παλαιὸν εἶχον Οἴνωτροι." ἔπειτα διεξελθὼν ὃν 
τρόπον ἐπολιτεύοντο, καὶ ὡς βασιλεὺς ἐν αὐτοῖς 
᾿Ιταλὸς ἀνὰ χρόνον ἐγένετο, ἀφ᾽ οὗ μετωνομάσθησαν 
» / / ὃ A \ > \ / ὃ ὃ / 
]ταλοί, τούτου δὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν Mopyns διεδέξατο, 
> 7? - ΄ » , A >> ἐδ \ > 
ἀφ᾽ οὗ Μόργητες ἐκλήθησαν, καὶ ws Σικελὸς ἐπι- 
ἕξενωθεὶς Μόργητι ἰδίαν πράττων ἀρχὴν διέστησε 
eee > , , cee \ \ \ 
τὸ ἔθνος, ἐπιφέρει ταυτί: “οὕτω δὲ Σικελοὶ Kat 
͵, 3; ἃ 1> ͵ εν, ” > 
Mopynrtes ἐγένοντο καὶ ᾿Ιταλίητες ἐόντες Οἴνωτροι. 
XII. Φέρε δὴ καὶ τὸ γένος chev? ἦν τὸ τῶν 
Οἰνώτρων ἀποδείξωμεν, ἕτερον ἄνδρα τῶν ἀρχαίων 
συγγραφέων παρασχόμενοι μάρτυρα, Φερεκύδην τὸν 
Onvatov,® γενεαλόγων οὐδενὸς δεύτερον. πεποίη- 
ται γὰρ αὐτῷ περὶ τῶν ἐν Αρκαδίᾳ βασιλευσάντων 
50€ 4 ὁ λόγος: “ [TeX 0 καὶ A Ἵ Ἶ 
ὅδε ὁ λόγος ελασγοῦ καὶ Δηιανείρης γίνεται 
Λυκάων: οὗτος γαμεῖ Κυλλήνην, Νηΐδα νύμφην, 
ἀφ᾽ ἧς τὸ ὄρος ἡ Κυλλήνη καλεῖται.᾽᾽ ἔπειτα τοὺς 
ἐκ τούτων γεννηθέντας διεξιὼν καὶ τίνας ἕκαστοι 
Μ 
τόπους ᾧκησαν, Οἰνώτρου καὶ [Π]ευκετίου μιμνή- 
/ ae cc \ " > > ec ” 
σκεται λέγων ὧδε- “καὶ Oivwrpos, ἀφ᾽ οὗ Οἴνωτροι 
/ « > > / > / \ /, 
καλέονται ot ev ᾿Ϊταλίῃ οἰκέοντες, καὶ IlevKérwos, 
> > 4» / , δι, ~ > / / >> 
ἀφ᾽ οὗ ΠΠ]ευκέτιοι καλέονται οἱ ἐν τῷ ᾿Ϊονίῳ κόλπῳ. 
τὰ μὲν οὖν ὑπὸ τῶν παλαιῶν εἰρημένα ποιητῶν τε 
καὶ μυθογράφων περί τε οἰκήσεως καὶ γένους τῶν 
~ > 
Οἰνώτρων τοιαῦτά ἐστιν: ois ἐγὼ πειθόμενος, εἰ 
1Cobet: (radia Ο. *Dobree: ὅσον O. 
3Casaubon: τῶν ἀθηναίων O. 4Kriger: ὧδε O. 





1 Pherecydes (fifth century) was one of the more prom- 
inent of the early logographers and the first prose writer 
of Athens. His great work was a mythological history, 


40 


BOOK 1. 12, 3-13, 2 


the ancient tales; this country, which is now called 
Italy. was formerly possessed by tbe Oenotrians.” 
Then he relates in what manner they were governed 
and says that in the course of time Italus came to 
be their king, after whom they were named Italians ; 
that this man was succeeded by Morges. after whom 
they were called Morgetes, and that Sicelus, being 
received as a guest by Morges and setting up a 
kingdom for himself, divided the nation. After 
which he adds these words: “‘ Thus those who 
had been Oenotrians became Sicels. Morgetes and 
Italians.” 

XIII. Now let me also show the origin of the 
Oenoitrian race, offering as my witness another of 
the early historians, Pherecydes of Athens,! who was 
a genealogist inferior to none. He thus expresses 
himself concerning the kings of Arcadia: “ Of 
Pelasgus and Deianira was born Lycaon; this man 
married Cyllené, a Naiad nymph, after whom 
Mount Cyllené is named.” Then, having given 
an account of their children and of the places each 
of them inhabited, he mentions Oenctrus and 
Peucetius, in these words: “‘ And Oenotrus, after 
whom are named the Oenotrians who live in Italy, 
and Peucetius, after whom are named the Peuce- 
tians who live on the Ionian Gulf.” Such, then, are 
the accounts given by the ancient poets and writers 
of legends concerning the places of abode and the 
origin of the Oenotrians; and on their authority 


beginning with a brief theogony, but largely devoted to 
the genealogies of the great families of the heroic age. 
The following quotations appear as frg. 85 in Miller, 
PuiM.G. 1. p. 92. 


4] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ » i. ~ > ~ 
τῷ ὄντι ᾿λληνικὸν φῦλον ἦν τὸ τῶν ᾿Αβοριγίνων, 
e ~ 
ws Κάτωνι καὶ Σεμπρωνίῳ καὶ πολλοῖς ἄλλοις 
ul ~ 
εἴρηται, τούτων ἔγγονον αὐτὸ! τῶν Οἰνώτρων 
/ 

Tiepa.2 τὸ yap δὴ Πελασγικὸν καὶ τὸ Κρητικὸν 
Ἐπ ἂν LAA > ia Nb »” ¢ / 6 ,ὔ 
καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἐν ᾿Ιταλίᾳ ᾧκησεν, ὑστέροις εὑρίσκω 
χρόνοις ἀφικόμενα" παλαιότερον δὲ τούτου στόλον 
> / ~ ¢ / > A / ~ 
ἀπαναστάντα τῆς “EAAddos εἰς τὰ προσεσπέρια τῆς 
Εὐρώπης οὐδένα δύναμαι καταμαθεῖν. τοὺς δὲ 

΄- /, 

Oiveitpovs τῆς τ᾽ ἄλλης ᾿Ιταλίας πολλὰ χωρία 
οἴομαι κατασχεῖν, τὰ μὲν ἔρημα, τὰ δὲ φαύλως 

> / / \ \ \ ~ > ~ 
οἰκούμενα καταλαβόντας, Kal δὴ καὶ τῆς ᾿Ομβρικῶν 

- ” Δ > / ~ ui? ~ 
γῆς ἔστιν ἣν ἀποτεμέσθαι, κληθῆναι δὴ ABopryivas 
ἐπὶ τῆς ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν οἰκήσεως (Ἀρκαδικὸν γὰρ 
τὸ φιλοχωρεῖν ὄρεσιν 5), ὡς ὑπερακρίους τινὰς καὶ 

/ > / > / / A 

παραλίους ᾿Αθήνησιν. εἰ δέ τινες πεφύκασι μὴ 
ταχεῖς εἶναι περὶ πραγμάτων παλαιῶν ἀβασανίστως 
τὰ λεγόμενα δέχεσθαι, μὴ ταχεῖς ἔστωσαν μηδὲ 

, a > \ so» \ , 
Atyvas ἢ ᾿Ομβρικοὺς ἢ ἄλλους τινὰς βαρβάρους 
αὐτοὺς νομίσαι, περιμείναντες δὲ καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ 
μαθεῖν κρινέτωσαν ἐξ ἁπάντων τὸ πιθανώτατον. 

~ e ~ ΝΜ 
XIV. Τῶν δὲ πόλεων, ἐν αἷς τὸ πρῶτον ῴκησαν 
- ~ ~ ec A 
᾿ἈΑβοριγῖνες, ὀλίγαι περιῆσαν ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ: at δὲ πλεῖσται 
ς / 6. / \ LAA ~ > A θ - 
ὑπό τε πολέμων καὶ ἄλλων κακῶν οἰκοφθορηθεῖσαι 
- 4 > Ψ ae Zz - ~ 
ἔρημοι ἀφεῖνται. ἦσαν δ᾽ ev τῇ Peatwn γῇ τῶν 
,ὔ » > 4 ΄ "“ > - ,ὔ 

lrovrwy ἔγγονον αὐτὸ R: τοῦτο" ἔγγονον αὐτῶν B; τούτων 

ἔγγονον αὐτῶν Jacoby. 


2 τίθεμαι Reiske, ὑποτίθεμαι Jacoby: πείθομαι Ο. 
8 ὄρεσιν O: ἐν ὄρεσιν Jacoby. 


42 


BOOK I. 13, 2-14, 1 


I assume that if the Aborigines were in reality a 
Greek nation, according to the opinion of Cato, 
Sempronius and many others, they were de- 
scendants of these Oenotrians. For I find that the 
Pelasgians and Cretans and the other nations that 
lived in Italy came thither afterwards; nor can I 
discover that any other expedition more ancient 
than this came from Greece to the western parts of 
Europe. I am of the opinion that the Oenotrians, 
besides making themselves masters of many cther 
regions in Italy, some of which they found unoccu- 
pied and others but thinly inhabited, also seized 
a portion of the country of the Umbrians, and that 
they were called Aborigines from their dwelling 
on the mountains! (for it is characteristic of the 
Arcadians to be fond of the mountains), in the same 
manner as at Athens some are called Hyperakrioi,? 
and others Paralioi.? But if any are naturally slow in 
giving credit to accounts of ancient matters without 
due examination, let them be slow also in believing 
the Aborigines to be Ligurians, Umbrians, or any 
other barbarians, and let them suspend their judg- 
ment till they have heard what remains to be told 
and then determine which opinion out of all is the 
most probable. 

XIV. Of the cities firstinhabited by the Aborigines 
few remained in my day; the greatest part of them, 
having been laid waste both by wars and other 
calamities, are abandoned. These cities were in 
the Reatine territory, not far from the Apennine 


1 A hybrid etymology : ab + ὄρος (mountain). 
2 People of the highlands. 8 People of the coast. 


43 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


"A / » A > / e 3. 8 tL ,ὔ 
πεννίνων ὀρῶν οὐ μακράν, ὡς Οὐάρρων Τερέντιος 
ἐν ἀρχαιολογίαις γράφει, ἀπὸ τῆς “Ῥωμαίων πόλεως 
αἱ τὸ βραχύτατον ἀπέχουσαι ἡμερήσιον διάστημα 
ὁδοῦ: ὧν ἐγὼ τὰς ἐπιφανεστάτας, ὡς ἐκεῖνος 
ἱστορεῖ, διηγήσομαι. [Παλάτιον μὲν πέντε πρὸς 
- ww / > ~ « / / 
Tots εἴκοσι σταδίοις ἀφεστῶσα “Ρεάτου, πόλεως 
> / pe x © / ” \ , > 2 / 
οἰκουμένης 5 ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμέ, Koivtias 
ὁδοῦ πλησίον. Τριβόλα 5 δὲ ἀμφὶ τοὺς ἑξήκοντα 
σταδίους τῆς αὐτῆς πόλεως ἀφεστῶσα, λόφον ἐπι- 
θ / / Σ λ 4 δὲ A > \ 
καθημένη σύμμετρον. veopoAa* δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ 
διάστημα τῆς Τριβόλας ἀπέχουσα, τῶν Κεραυνίων 
ὁρῶν πλησίον. ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης τετταράκοντα 
σταδίοις διῃρημένη πόλις ἐπιφανὴς Σούνα,β ἔνθα 
νεὼς πάνυ ἀρχαῖός ἐστιν Ἄρεος. ήφυλα δὲ ὡς 
τριάκοντα σταδίους 5 ἄπωθεν τῆς Σούνης᾽ δεί- 
κνυται δὲ αὐτῆς ἐρείπιά τε καὶ τείχους ἴχνη. 
τετταράκοντα δὲ σταδίους ἀπέχουσα Μἥιηφύλης 
ὌὋ oh > / » - > 50 / 
ρουΐνιον, εἰ Kat τις ἄλλη τῶν αὔτοθι πόλεων 
ἐπιφανὴς καὶ μεγάλη" δῆλοι γάρ εἰσιν αὐτῆς οἵ τε 
θεμέλιοι τῶν τειχῶν καὶ τάφοι τινὲς ἀρχαιοπρεπεῖς 
καὶ πολυανδρίων ἐν ὑψηλοῖς χώμασι μηκυνομένων 
1 Jacoby: βάρρων O. 2 πόλις οἰκουμένη Bunsen. 
3 Τρηβοῦλα Cluver. 


4 συεσβόλα AB: Συεσσόλα Sylburg. 
5 Yoava Sylburg. 6 Kiessling: σταδίοις O. 





1 This monumental work of antiquarian lore is no longer 
extant. Varro was a native of Reate (49 Roman miles 
north-east of Rome), and may well have taken a particular 
interest in these old sites of the Aborigines. The latest 
discussion of this chapter is to be found in Nissen, Italische 
Landeskunde, ii. 1, pp. 471-6; Bunsen’s article appeared 


44 


BOOK 1. 14, 1-3 


mountains, as Terentius Varro writes in his Antiqut- 
ties, the nearest being one day’s journey distant from 
Rome. I shall enumerate the most celebrated of 
them, following his account. Palatium, twenty-five 
stades distant from Reate (a city that was still in- 
habited by Romans down to my time),? near the 
Quintian αν. Tribula, about sixty stades from 
Reate and standing upon a low hill. Suesbula, at 
the same distance from Tribula, near the Ceraunian 
Mountains. Suna, a famous citv forty stades from 
Suesbula; in it there is a very ancient temple of 
Mars. Mefula, about thirty stades from Suna; its 
ruins and traces of its walls are pointed out. Or- 
vinium, forty stades from Mefula, a city as famous 
and large as any in tha: region; for the founda- 
tions of its walls are still to be seen and some tombs 
of venerable antiquity, as well as the circuits of 
bucying-places + extending over lofty mounds; and 


in the Annali dell’ Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica, 
vi. (1834), pp. 129 ff. See also Smith’s Dict. of Greek and 
Roman Geography, s.v. Aborigines. 

2 Bunsen emended the text so as to make the clause 
here included in parentheses refer to Palatium; he held 
that Reate was too well known to call for such an ex- 
planation. 

3 The Via Quintia is not elsewhere mentioned, but seems 
to have been the more direct of two roads leading down 
the valley to the north-west of Reate. The names of the 
towns that immediately follow are probably corruptions 
of Trebula and Suessula. The Ceraunian Mountains are 
tentatively identified by Nissen with the Monte Rotondo 
of to-day. 

*The word polyandrion usually means a place where 
many are buried together; it is contrasted, as here, with 
individual tombs by Aelian, Var. Hist. xii. 21, and Pau- 
sanias ii. 22, 9. 


45 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


περίβολοι: ἔνθα Kai νεὼς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐστιν ἀρχαῖος, 
ἱδρυμένος ἐπὶ τῆς ἄκρας. 

Azo δὲ σταδίων ὀγδοήκοντα ‘“Pedtov τοῖς 
» sad ὃ A ~ K / 1 sO ~ A Κό Ὁ} ᾿' 
ἰοῦσι διὰ τῆς Κουρίας ' ὁδοῦ παρὰ Kopnrov? ὄρος 
Κόρσουλα 8 νεωστὶ διεφθαρμένη. δείκνυται δέ τις 
καὶ νῆσος, "loca αὐτῇ ὄνομα, λίμνῃ περίρρυτος, ἣν 
χωρὶς ἐρύματος ποιητοῦ κατοικῆσαι λέγονται τοῖς 
τέλμασι τῆς λίμνης ὁπόσα τείχεσι χρώμενοι. 
πλησίον δὲ τῆς “Icons Μαρούιον ἐπὶ τῷ μυχῷ 
τῆς αὐτῆς λίμνης κειμένη, τετταράκοντα σταδίους 
ἀπέχουσα τῶν καλουμένων ‘Entra ὑδάτων. 

Azo δὲ “Pedrov πάλιν τοῖς ἃ τὴν ἐπὶ Διστίνην ὃ 
ὁδὸν ἰοῦσι Βατία μὲν ἀπὸ τριάκοντα σταδίων, 
Τιώρα δὲ ἀπὸ τριακοσίων, ἡ καλουμένη Ματιήνη. 

1 Κουρίας Chaupy, ᾿Ιουλίας Portus, Οὐαλερίας Sylburg, 
Σαλαρίας Gelenius: foupias O. 

2 Κόριτον Cluver. 

3 Καρσοῦλα Cluver. 

ὁ τοῖς Kiessling: om. O, Jacoby. 

5 Nissen : λιτίνην A, λατίνην R; λίμνην Bunsen. 

δ foto. Kiessling: ἰοῦσιν ἡ O. 





1 The Via Curia is thought to have been a second road 
leading north-west from Reate but running round the 
east and north sides of the chain of small lakes called by 
the collective name of Lacus Velinus or Palus Reatina. 
M’. Curius Dentatus in 272 drained the lowlands at the 
northern end of the valley, and he may well have con- 
structed this road at that time. Mount Coretus is un- 
known. The Maruvium here named is not to be confused 
with the Marsian capital on the Fucine Lake. Cicero 
mentions the Septem Aquae in a letter to Atticus (iv. 15, 5). 

2 This reading is due to Nissen, who believes that Listina 
(the district of Lista) was an earlier name for the district of 
Amiternum. In view of the story related at the end of the 


46 


BOOK IT. 14, 3-5 


there is also an ancient temple of Minerva built on 
the summit. 

At the distance of eighty stades from Reate, as 
one goes along the Curian Way ' past Mount Coretus, 
stood Coisula, a town but recently destroyed. There 
is also pointed out an island, called Issa, surrounded 
by a ake; the Aborigines are said to have lived on 
this island without any artificial fortification, relying 
on the marshy waters of the lake instead o: walls. 
Near Issa is Maruvum, situated on an arm of the 
same lake and distant forty stades from what they 
call the Septem Aquae. 

Again, as one goes from Reate by the road towards 
the Listine district,” there is Batia,® thirty stades 
distant; then Tiora, called Matiene, at a distance of 


chapter Lista must have been fairly close to Amiternum, 
which was 33 miles east of Reate. The vulgate reading 
with “ατίνην, “the road to Latium ’”’ or possibly “ to the 
Latin Way,’’ has been taken to mean a road leading south- 
east from Reate towards the Fucine Lake, and Bunsen’s 
emendation λίμνην was designed to make that direction 
still plainer. But the site, a few miles north-west of that 
lake, which various scholars have selected for Lista is 
more than 20 miles distant from Amiternum across a 
mountain pass; moreover, it lies in the country of the 
Aequians, which is not reported to have been occupied by 
the Sabines at any time. Nissen’s view likewise places 
Lista distinctly outside the Reatine territory. But it is 
quite possible that the distance of 300 stades assigned to 
Tiora is seriously in error; we might then look for Tiora 
and Lista a little east of Interocreum, or somewhat more 
than half-way from Reate to Amiternum. Nissen un- 
justifiably assumes that in this entire section Dionysius 
is counting the stade as only one-tenth of a Roman mile, 
instead of one-eighth of a mile, as he usually does. 
3 Or Vatia. 


47 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


2 / / / » ΄ / 
ev ταύτῃ λέγεται χρηστήριον Ἄρεος γενέσθαι πάνυ 
ἀρχαῖον. ὁ δὲ τρόπος αὐτοῦ παραπλήσιος ἦν ὥς 
φασι τῷ παρὰ Δωδωναίοις μυθολογουμένῳ ποτὲ 
γενέσθαι: πλὴν ὅσον ἐκεῖ μὲν ἐπὶ δρυὸς ἱερᾶς 
ἔλεια καθεζομένη θ δεῖν ἐλέ 1 δὲ 
méAcia! καθεζομένη θεσπιῳδεῖν ἐλέγετο, παρὰ δὲ 
τοῖς Αβοριγῖσι θεόπεμπτος ὄρνις, ὃν αὐτοὶ μὲν 
πῖκον, Ἕλληνες δὲ δρυοκολάπτην καλοῦσιν, ἐπὶ 
κίονος ξυλίνου φαινόμενος τὸ αὐτὸ ἔδρα. τέτ- 
ταρας δ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῖς εἴκοσι σταδίοις ἀπέχουσα τῆς 
> / / / / > / 
εἰρημένης πόλεως Aiota, μητρόπολις Αβοριγίνων, 
ἣν παλαίτερον ἔτι Σαβῖνοι νύκτωρ ἐπιστρατεύσαντες 
> / > / > / ¢ ~ ¢ a 9 
ἐκ πόλεως ‘Apirépvns ἀφύλακτον αἱροῦσιν ot δ᾽ ἐκ 
τῆς ἁλώσεως περισωθέντες ὑποδεξαμένων αὐτοὺς 
c , ε \ ͵ > er > 
Peativwy, ὡς πολλὰ πειραθέντες οὐχ οἷοί τε ἦσαν 
ἀπολαβεῖν, ἱερὰν ἀνῆκαν ὡς σφετέραν ἔτι τὴν γῆν, 
> ~ 
ἐξαγίστους ποιήσαντες ἀραῖς τοὺς καρπωσομένους 
αὐτὴν ὕστερον. 
ς / 
XV. And δὲ σταδίων ἑβδομήκοντα “Pedtov 
\ \ od - 
Κοτυλία πόλις ἐπιφανὴς πρὸς ὄρει κειμένη: ἧς 
ἐστιν οὐ πρόσω λίμνη τεττάρων πλέθρων ἔχουσα 
~ la / > 
τὴν διάστασιν, αὐθιγενοῦς πλήρης νάματος ἀπορ- 
A 
ρέοντος del, βάθος ws λέγεται ἄβυσσος. ταύτην 


1 πέλεια added here by Jacoby, after καθεζομένη by 
Sintenis; περιστερὰ added by Steph. 





1 At Dodona the god was said to dwell in the stem of an 
oak and to reveal his will from the branches of the tree, 
probably by the rustling of the leaves. In the time of 
Herodotus the oracles were interpreted by two or three 
aged women called πελειάδες or πέλειαι, both terms 
meaning “‘pigeons.”’ According to some it was actually 
a pigeon that delivered the oracles. 


48 


BOOK T. 14, 5-15, 1 


three hundred stades. In this city, they say, there 
was a very ancient oracle of Mars, the nature of which 
was similar to that of the oracle which legend says 
once existed at Doduna; only there a pigeon wes 
said to prophesy, sitt:ng on a sacred oak,! whereas 
ameng the Aborigines a heaven-sent bird, which 
they call picus and the Greeks dryokolaptés.? ap- 
pearing ona pillar of wood, did the same. ‘Twenty- 
four stades from the afore-mentioned city? stood 
Lista, the mother-city of the Aborigines, which at 
a still earlier time the Sabines had captured Ly a sur- 
prise attack, having set out against it from Amiter- 
num by night. Those who survived the taking of 
the place, after being received by the Reatines, made 
many attempts to retake their former home. but 
being unable to do so, they consecrated the country 
to the gods, as if it were still their own, invoking 
curses against those who should enjoy the fruits of it. 

XV. Seventy stades from Reate stood Cutilia,4 
a famous city, beside a mountain. Not far from it 
there is a lake, four hundred feet in diameter, filled 
by everflowing natural springs and, it is said, bot- 
tomless. This lake, as having something divine about 


2 Both the Greek and Latin words mean ‘“‘ woodpecker.”’ 

3 The context certainly suggests Tiora as the city re- 
ferred to; but Holstenius understood Reate, and thus 
brought Lista between Cutilia and Reate, where the name 
Monte di Lesta is found to-day. 

4 Also called Cutiliae. Its approximate site is deter- 
mined by the remains of Aquae Cutiliae near by, a watering- 
place that was especially favoured by the Flavian emperors. 
It lay east of Reate, on the road last mentioned, if Nissen’s 
identification of that road is correct. He suggests that the 
place is mentioned last, out of its natural order, in view of 
the important réle the lake was to play later (see chap. 19). 


49 
VOL. I. D 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μ᾿ / θ A e \ ~ / €, > , 
ἐχουσάν τι θεοπρεπὲς ἱερὰν τῆς Νίκης οἱ ἐπιχώριοι 
΄ \ 7 / / 1 
νομίζουσι καὶ περιείρξαντες κύκλῳ σταυρώμασι 
- / ~ / 
τοῦ μηδένα τῷ νάματι πελάζειν ἄβατον φυλάττουσιν, 
“ \ z > ͵ 22 e ε \ ΄, a 
OTL μὴ καιροῖς τισιν ETNOILoOLS,” ἐν οἷς ἱερὰ θύουσιν ἃ 
/ > ~ ~ ~ 
νόμος ἐπιβαίνοντες τῆς ἐν αὐτῇ νησῖδος οἷς ὅσιον. 
ε \ ~ > ~ 
ἢ δὲ νῆσός ἐστι μὲν ὡσπερὰν πεντήκοντα ποδῶν 
\ / ~ 
τὴν διάμετρον, ὑπερανέστηκε δὲ τοῦ νάματος οὐ 
A A Ἃ ὃ ~ “ ξ > ὃ δ᾽ > \ \ 
πλεῖον Ἢ ποδιαῖον ὕψος: avidpuTos ἐστὶ καὶ 
/ ~ ~ ᾽ \ » > 
περινήχεται πολλαχῇ δινοῦντος αὐτὴν ἄλλοτε κατ 
»Μ ~ / 
ἄλλους τόπους ἠρέμα τοῦ πνεύματος. χλόη δέ τις 
> ~ A \ / 
ἐν αὐτῇ φύεται βουτόμῳ προσεμφερὴς Kat θάμνοι 
\ ~ ~ / 7 
τινὲς οὐ μεγάλοι, πρᾶγμα κρεῖττον λόγου Tots 
10 ΄ 6 ε ΄ὔ ὃ ~ \ θ 2 ha Ts) ‘ 
ἀθεάτοις ὧν ἡ φύσις δρᾷ καὶ θαυμάτων οὐδενὸς 
δεύτερον. 
ς» - 
XVI. Τὴν μὲν δὴ πρώτην οἴκησιν οἱ ‘ABopryives 
> ~ / > bf 
ev τούτοις λέγονται ποιήσασθαι τοῖς τόποις, ἐξελά- 
~ > ~ \ ¢ / 
σαντες ἐξ αὐτῶν ᾿Ομβρικούς. ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ὁρμώ- 
- Μ / \ / tA 
μενοι τοῖς τε ἄλλοις βαρβάροις καὶ πάντων μάλιστα 
- > \ ~ / > 
Σικελοῖς ὁμοτέρμοσιν οὖσιν ὑπὲρ τῆς χώρας ἐπο- 
~ > ~ / 
λέμουν, TO μὲν πρῶτον ἱερά τις ἐξελθοῦσα νεότης, 
»” > / \ / / ¢ \ oe ~ / 
ἄνδρες ὀλίγοι κατὰ βίου ζήτησιν ὑπὸ τῶν γειναμένων 
~ > - ΗΡ 
ἀποσταλέντες, ἔθος ἐκπληροῦντες ἀρχαῖον, ᾧ πολ- 
« / > / 
λοὺς βαρβάρων τε καὶ ᾿ Ελλήνων ἐπίσταμαι χρησα- 
5) ~ > / 
μένους. ὁπότε yap εἰς ὄχλου πλῆθος ἐπίδοσιν 
͵ \ > , 
αἱ πόλεις τισὶ λάβοιεν ὥστε μηκέτι TAS οἰκείας 


1Smit: στέμμασι Ο, Jacoby. 
ὥτισιν ἐτησίοις B: τισι διετησίοις R, Jacoby. 


50 


BOOK 1. 15, 1-16, 2 


it, the inhabitants of the country look upon as sacred 
to Victory: and surrounding it with a palisade, so 
that no one may approach the water, they keep it 
inviolate ; except that at certain times each year 
those whose sacred office it is go to the little island 
in the lake and perform the sacrifices required by 
custom. This island is about fifty feet in diameter 
and rises not more than a foot above the water; 
it is not fixed, and floats about in any direction, 
according as the wind gently wafts it from one 
place to another. An herb grows on the island 
like the flowering rush and also certain small shrubs, 
a phenomenon which to those who are unacquainted 
with the works of Nature seems unaccountable and 
a marvel second to none.! 

XVI. The Aborigines are said to have settled first 
in these places after they had driven out the 
Umbrians. And making excursions from there, 
they warred not only upon the barbarians in general 
but particularly upon the Sicels, their neighbours, 
in order to dispossess them of their lands. First, 
a sacred band of young men went forth, consisting 
of a few who were sent out by their parents to seek 
a livelihood, according to a custom which I know 
many barbarians and Greeks have followed.2 For 
whenever the population of any of their cities 
increased to such a degree that the produce of their 

1 The fullest account and explanation of this strange 
islet is given by Seneca (Nat. Quaest. iii. 25, 8). The lake 
is still to be seen, but the islet has disappeared. 

* The only recorded instance from the Greek world is that 
of the Chalcidians, who dedicated to Apollo one man in 
every ten and sent them to Delphi; these men later 


founded Rhegium (Strabo vi. 1, 6). Compare chap. 24 and 
note, 
51 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


4 a Ss ~ Ἅ ~ ~ 
τροφὰς ἅπασιν εἶναι διαρκεῖς, ἢ κακωθεῖσα ταῖς 
~ ~ / 
οὐρανίοις μεταβολαῖς ἡ γῆ σπανίους τοὺς εἰωθότας 

\ » 4 1 av / ὃ 10 LAA A 
καρποὺς ἐξενέγκειεν,. ἢ τοιόνδε τι πάθος ἄλλο τὰς 
ΕΣ » ΕΣ ~ 
πόλεις κατασχὸν εἴτε ἄμεινον εἴτε χεῖρον ἀνάγκην 
>] ~ ᾽ὔ ~ oa 
ἐπιστήσειε μειώσεως τοῦ πλήθους, θεῶν ὅτῳ δὴ 
~ > , A - 
καθιεροῦντες ἀνθρώπων ἐτείους γονὰς ἐξέπεμπον 
»] ~ 5 
ὅπλοις κοσμήσαντες ἐκ τῆς σφετέρας. εἰ μὲν ὑπὲρ 
͵ὔ Ἅ / σ᾿ / om. 
εὐανδρίας ἢ νίκης ἐκ πολέμου χαριστήρια θεοῖς 
~ e A / 
ἀποδιδοῖεν, προθύοντες ἱερὰ τὰ νομιζόμενα, εὐφήμοις 
~ / > 
οἰωνοῖς τὰς ἀποικίας προπέμποντες " εἰ δ᾽ ἐπὶ μηνί- 
, / ~ 
μασι δαιμονίοις ἀπαλλαγὰς αἰτούμενοι τῶν κατε- 
~ ~ / ~ 
χόντων σφᾶς κακῶν τὸ παραπλήσιον dp@ev, αὐτοί 
5» ~ 
τε ἀχθόμενοι Kal συγγνώμονας ἀξιοῦντες γενέσθαι 
ε 
τοὺς ἀπελαυνομένους. οἱ δὲ ἀπαναστάντες ὡς 
~ ~ / 
οὐκέτι τῆς πατρῴας γῆς μεταληψόμενοι, εἰ μὴ 
Ν \ / 
κτήσαιντο ἑτέραν, τὴν ὑποδεξαμένην αὐτοὺς εἴτε 
πρὸς φιλίαν εἴτε ἐν πολέμῳ κρατηθεῖσαν πατρίδα 
~ 7 / Φ - 
ἐποιοῦντο: ὅ τε θεός, ᾧ κατονομασθεῖεν ἀπελαυνό- 
/ » ~ e \ \ 2 7 4 
μενοι, συλλαμβάνειν αὐτοῖς ws τὰ πολλὰ ἐδόκει καὶ 
παρὰ τὴν ἀνθρωπίνην δόξαν κατορθοῦν τὰς ἀποικίας. 
/ \ ~ / 4 \ 4 ~ 5 / 
TOUTW δὴ τῷ νόμῳ χρώμενοι καὶ τότε τῶν Afopeyt- 
νων τινὲς ἀνθούντων ἀνδράσι τῶν χωρίων (κτείνειν 
Ἁ Te) / ~~ 5» / WE ,ὔ » 2 is) ‘ or 
yap οὐδένα τῶν ἐκγόνων ἠξίουν, ἄγος " οὐδενὸς ἔλατ- 
τον τοῦτο τιθέμενοι), θεῶν ὅτῳ δὴ καθιερώσαντες 
ἐνιαυσίους γονὰς ἀνδρωθέντας ἀποικίζουσι τοὺς 
~ >] ~ / a A A »” / 
παῖδας ἐκ τῆς σφετέρας, οἱ τοὺς Σικελοὺς ἄγοντές 
\ , ¥ > 4 \ A {“ ~ » ͵ὕ 
τε καὶ φέροντες διετέλουν, ἐπειδὴ τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἐξέ- 


1 Jacoby: ἐξήνεγκεν O. 
2 ἄγος R: dyouvs B, Jacoby. 


92 


BOOK I. 16, 2-4 


lands no longer sufficed for them all, or the earth, 
injured by unseasonable changes of the weather, 
brought forth her fruits in less abundance than 
usual, or any other occurrence of like nature, either 
good or bad, introduced a necessity of lessening their 
numbers, they would dedicate to some god or other 
all the men born within a certain year, and pro- 
viding them with arms, would send them out of 
their country. If, indeed, this was done by way of 
thanksgiving for populousness or for victory in war, 
they would first offer the usual sacrifices and then 
send forth their colonies under happy auspices ; 
but if, having incurred the wrath of Heaven, they 
were seeking deliverance from the evils that beset 
them, they would perform much the same ceremony, 
but sorrowfully and begging forgiveness of the 
youths they were sending away. And those who 
departed, feeling that henceforth they would have 
no share in the land of their fathers but must acquire 
another, looked upon any land that received them 
in friendship or that they conquered in war as their 
country. And the god to whom they had been dedi- 
cated when they were sent out seemed generally 
to assist them and to prosper the colonies beyond 
all human expectation. In pursuance, therefore, of 
this custom some of the Aborigines also at that 
time, as their places were growing very populous 
(for they would not put any of their children to 
death, looking on this as one of the greatest of crimes), 
dedicated to some god or other the offspring of 
a certain year and when these children were grown 
to be men they sent them out of their country as 
colonists; and they, after leaving their own land, were 


οὐ 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> - ~ ~ 
5 λιπον. ws δ᾽ ἅπαξ οὗτοι χωρίων τινῶν τῆς πολε- 
/ > / > ~ 
μίας ἐκράτησαν, ἐκ τοῦ ἀσφαλεστέρου ἤδη Kal ot 
~ ς ΄ “-“- 
λοιποὶ ᾿Αβοριγῖνες ot δεόμενοι γῆς κατὰ σφᾶς 
ἕκαστοι ἐπεχείρουν τοῖς ὁμόροις καὶ πόλεις ἔκτισαν 
ἄλλας τέ τινας καὶ τὰς μέχρι τοῦδε οἰκουμένας, 
Avreuvatas καὶ Τελληνεῖς καὶ Φικολνέους τοὺς 
‘\ ~ 4 / »» \ 
πρὸς Tots καλουμένοις ΚΚορνίκλοις ὄρεσι καὶ Τιβουρ- 
τίνους, παρ᾽ οἷς ἔτι καὶ εἰς τόδε χρόνου μέρος τι 
τῆς πόλεως ὀνομάζεται Σὶικελικόν: καὶ ἦσαν ἁπάν- 
των μάλιστα τῶν προσοικούντων λυπηροὶ τοῖς 
Σικελοῖς. ἀνίσταται δὲ ἐκ τούτων τῶν διαφορῶν 
~ » σ / -“ , \ ~ ’ 
τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ὅλοις πόλεμος ὅσος οὐδεὶς τῶν πρό- 
τερον γενομένων ἐν ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ, καὶ προῆλθεν ἄχρι 
πολλοῦ χρόνου μηκυνόμενος. 
XVII. Ἔπειτα [Πελασγῶν τινες τῶν οἰκούντων 
~ ~ \ ¢ ~ 
ev τῇ καλουμένῃ viv Θετταλίᾳ τὴν ἑαυτῶν avay- 
- ΄ > - 
κασθέντες ἐκλιπεῖν σύνοικοι γίνονται τοῖς Αβοριγῖσι 
καὶ κοινῇ μετ᾽ ἐκείνων ἐπολέμουν πρὸς τοὺς Σὶικε- 
/ > / \ > \ ὄρ 3 ~ ” \ 
Aovs. ἐδέξαντο δὲ αὐτοὺς ot ABopryives, tows μὲν 
\ \ \ ~ > / > , ε > 
Kal κατὰ τὴν τοῦ ὠφεληθήσεσθαι ἐλπίδα, ws ὃ 
“5 
5 ἐγὼ πείθομαι κατὰ τὸ συγγενὲς μάλιστα. ἦν 
A \ \ \ ~ ~ / “EXA \ >? 
yap δὴ Kat τὸ τῶν ]ελασγῶν γένος ηνικὸν ἐκ 
- / A 
Πελοποννήσου τὸ ἀρχαῖον, ἐχρήσατο δὲ τύχαις 
/ > 
δυσπότμοις εἰς πολλὰ μὲν Kat ἄλλα, μάλιστα ὃ 
» \ / / \ > \ / / 
eis τὴν πολύπλανόν τε καὶ οὐδενὸς τόπου βέβαιον 
~ \ / ~ 
οἴκησιν: πρῶτον μὲν yap περὶ TO καλούμενον νῦν 
“. 5d e ¢ 
Ayaixov Ἄργος ᾧκησαν αὐτόχθονες ὄντες, ws ot 
~ \ \ > / 
πολλοὶ περὶ αὐτῶν λέγουσι. τὴν δὲ ἐπωνυμίαν 
~ ~ / 
ἔλαβον ἐξ ἀρχῆς ταύτην ἐπὶ IleAacyod? βασιλέως. 


1 πολλοῦ χρόνου Kiessiing: πόρρω χρόνῳ QO, 
54 


BOOK I. 16, 5-17, 2 


continually plundering the Sicels. And as soon as 
they became masters of any places in the enemy’s 
country the rest of the Aborigines, also, who needed 
lands now attacked each of them their neighbours 
with greater security and built various cities, some 
of which are inhabited to this day—Antemnae, 
Tellenae, Ficulea, which is near the Corniculan 
mountains, as they are called, and Tibur, where 
a quarter in the city is even to this day called the 
Sicel quarter!; and of al] their neighbours they 
harassed the Sicels most. From these quarrels 
there arose a general war between the nations more 
important than any that had occurred previously 
in Italy, and it went on extending over a long period 
of time. 

XVII. Afterwards some of the Pelasgians who 
inhabited Thessaly, as it is now called. being obliged 
to leave their country, settled among the Aborigines 
and jointly with them made war upon the Sicels. 
It is possible that the Aborigines received them 
partly in the hope of gaining their assistance. but 
I believe it was chiefly on account of their kinship ; 
for the Pelasgians, too, were a Greek nation originally 
from the Peloponnesus. They were unfortunate in 
many ways but particularly in wandering much and 
in having no fixed abode. For they first lived in 
the neighbourhood of the Achaean Argos, as it is 
now called, being natives of the country, according 
to most accounts. They received their name orig- 
inally from Pelasgus, their king. Pelasgus was the 


*Cary: τοῦ Πελασγοῦ O, Jacoby. 





_ 1 This would presumably be vicus Siculus or regio Sicula 
in Latin ; no mention of the quarter is found elsewhere. 


20 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


3 ἦν δὲ ὁ [Πελασγὸς ἐκ Aves, ws λέγεται, καὶ 
Νιόβης τῆς Φορωνέως, 7) πρώτῃ “γυναικὶ θνητῇ 
μίσγεται ὁ Ζεὺς ὡς ὁ μῦθος ἔχει. ἕκτῃ δ᾽ ὕστερον 
γενεᾷ “Πελοπόννησον ἐκλιπόντες εἰς τὴν τότε μὲν 
Aipoviav, νῦν δὲ Θετταλίαν ὀνομαζομένην μετανέ- 
στησαν: ἡγοῦντο δὲ τῆς ἀποικίας Aya.os καὶ Φθϊῖος 

\ ‘ ς / \ ~ cr Ψ 
καὶ Ilehkacyos ot Aapions καὶ []οσειδῶνος viot 
ἀφικόμενοι δ᾽ εἰς τὴν Αἰμονίαν τούς τε κατοικοῦντας 
ἐν αὐτῇ βαρβάρους ἐξελαύνουσι καὶ νέμονται τὴν 
χώραν τριχῇ, τοῖς ἡγεμόσι ποιήσαντες ὁμωνύμους 

\ / ~ ἢ 15 BA A ~ 
τὰς μοίρας, Φθιῶτιν Kai ᾿Αχαΐαν καὶ []ελασγιῶτιν. 
πέντε δὲ μείναντες αὐτόθι γενεάς, ἐν αἷς ἐπὶ μή- 
κιστον εὐτυχίας ἤλασαν τὰ κράτιστα τῶν ἐν τῇ 
Θετταλίᾳ πεδίων καρπούμενοι, περὶ τὴν ἕκτην 
Ά 5 / / «ε / / 
γενεὰν ἐξελαύνονται Θετταλίας ὑπό τε Κουρήτων 
καὶ Λελέγων, οἵ νῦν Αἰτωλοὶ καὶ Λοκροὶ καλοῦνται, 
καὶ συχνῶν ἄλλων τῶν περὶ τὸν Π]αρνασὸν οἰκούν- 
των, ἡγουμένου τῶν πολεμίων Δευκαλίωνος τοῦ 
/ \ \ / ~ > ~ 
Προμηθέως, μητρὸς δὲ Κλυμένης τῆς ᾽Ωκεανοῦ. 

ΧΥΠΙ. Σκεδασθέντες δὲ κατὰ τὴν φυγὴν οἱ μὲν 
εἰς Κρήτην ἀπῆλθον, οἱ δὲ τῶν Κυκλάδων νήσων 
τινὰς κατέσχον, οἱ δὲ THY! περὶ τὸν Ολυμπόν τε 

‘ \ »” ͵7 8, ~ ΕΙΣ 
καὶ τὴν Οσσαν, καλουμένην δὲ ᾿ Ἐστιαιῶτιν ᾧκισαν, 
ἄλλοι δὲ εἴς τε Βοιωτίαν καὶ Φωκίδα καὶ Εὔβοιαν 

/ € 3 > \ > / / 
διεκομίσθησαν οἱ δ᾽ εἰς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν περαιωθέντες 
- Ἁ \ ¢ /, / \ / 
τῆς περὶ tov ᾿ Ελλήσποντον παραλίου πολλὰ χωρία 
κατέσχον καὶ τῶν παρακειμένων αὐτῇ νήσων ἄλλας 
τε συχνὰς καὶ τὴν νῦν καλουμένην Λέσβον, ἀναμι- 
χθέντες τοῖς ἐκ τῆς ᾿ Ελλάδος στέλλουσι τὴν 27 al 
1 τὴν added by Ritschl. 


56 


BOOK I. 17, 3-18, 1 


son of Zeus, it is said, and of Niobé, the daughter 
of Phoroneus, who, as the legend goes, was the first 
mortal woman Zeus had knowledge of. In the sixth 
generation afterwards, leaving the Peloponnesus. 
they removed to the country which was then called 
Haemonia and now Thessaly. The leaders of the 
colony were Achaeus, Phthius and Pelasgus, the 
sons of Larisa and Poseidon. When they arrived 
in Haemonia they drove out the barbarian inhabi- 
tants and divided the country into three parts. 
calling them, after the names of their leaders, 
Phthiotis, Achaia and Pelasgiotis. After they had 
remained there five generations, during which they 
attained to the greatest prosperity while enjoying 
the produce of the most fertile plains in Thessaly, 
about the sixth generation they were driven out of 
it by the Curetes and Leleges, who are now called 
Aetolians and Locrians, and by many others who 
lived near Parnassus, their enemies being com- 
manded by Deucalion, the son of Prometheus and 
Clymené, the daughter of Oceanus. 

XVIII. And dispersing themselves in their flight, 
some went to Crete, others occupied some of the 
islands called the Cyclades, some settled in the region 
called Hestiaeotis near Olympus and Ossa, others 
crossed into Boeotia, Phocis and Euboea; and 
some, passing over into Asia, occupied many places 
on the coast along the Hellespont and many of the 
adjacent islands, particularly the one now called 
Lesbos, uniting with those who composed the first 
colony that was sent thither from Greece under 


οἱ 


bo 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἀποικίαν εἰς αὐτὴν ἄγοντος Μάκαρος τοῦ Kpwaxov. 
τὸ δὲ πλεῖον αὐτῶν μέρος διὰ τῆς μεσογείου τρα- 
πόμενοι πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Δωδώνῃ κατοικοῦντας σφῶν 
συγγενεῖς, οἷς οὐδεὶς ἠξίου πόλεμον ἐπιφέρειν ὡς 
ἱεροῖς, χρόνον μέν τινα σύμμετρον αὐτόθι διέτριψαν " 
ἐπεὶ δὲ λυπηροὶ αὐτοῖς ὄντες ἠσθάνοντο οὐχ ἱκανῆς 
οὔσης ἅπαντας τρέφειν τῆς γῆς, ἐκλείπουσι τὴν 
χώραν χρησμῷ πειθόμενοι κελεύοντι πλεῖν εἰς 
᾿Ιταλίαν, ἣ τότε Σατορνία ἐλέγετο. κατασκευασά- 
μενοι δὲ ναῦς πολλὰς περαιοῦνται τὸν ᾿Ϊόνιον, 
σπουδὴν μὲν ποιούμενοι τῶν ἔγγιστα τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας 
ἅψασθαι χωρίων: ὑπὸ δὲ νοτίου πνεύματος καὶ 
ἀγνοίας τῶν τόπων μετεωρότεροι ἐνεχθέντες καὶ 
πρὸς ἑνὶ τῶν τοῦ Ilddov στομάτων ὁρμισάμενοι 
Σπινῆτι καλουμένῳ tas? ναῦς μὲν αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ 
καταλείπουσι καὶ τὸν ἥκιστα δυνάμενον ταλαιπωρεῖν 
ὄχλον, φυλακὴν ἐπ᾽ αὐταῖς 5 καταστήσαντες, ὡς 
ἔχοιεν εἰ μὴ προχωροίη σφίσι τὰ πράγματα κατα- 
φυγήν. καὶ οἱ μὲν ὑπομείναντες ἐν τούτῳ τῷ 
χωρίῳ, τεῖχος τῷ στρατοπέδῳ περιβαλόμενοι καὶ 
ταῖς ναυσὶν εἰσκομίσαντες τὰς εἰς τὸν βίον εὐπορίας, 
ἐπειδὴ κατὰ γνώμην ἐδόκει χωρεῖν αὐτοῖς τὰ πράγ- 
ματα, πόλιν ἔκτισαν ὁμώνυμον τῷ στόματι τοῦ 
ποταμοῦ: εὐτύχησάν τε μάλιστα τῶν περὶ τὸν 
᾿Ιόνιον οἰκούντων θαλαττοκρατοῦντες ἄχρι πολλοῦ, 


1 Κρινάκου Wesseling, Κριάσου Sylburg, Jacoby: κιρασίου 
B, κριασίου R. 

2 τὰς ναῦς Hertlein: ναῦς O, Jacoby. 

ὃ ἐπ᾽ αὐταῖς Madvig: ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς A, αὐτοῦ Β. 

4 εὐτύχησάν τε Steph.: εὐτυχήσαντες Ο. 


οὗ 


BOOK 1. 18. 1-4 


Macar, the son of Crinacus.!' But the greater part 
of them, turning inland, took refuge among the 
inhabitants of Dodona, their kinsmen, against 
whom, as a sacred people, none would make war ; 
and there they remained for a reasonable time. 
But when they perceived they were growing burden- 
some to their hosts, since the land could not support 
them all, they left it in obedience to an oracle that 
commanded them to sail to Italy, which was then called 
Saturnia. And having prepared a great many ships 
they set out to cross the Ionian Gulf, endeavouring 
to reach the nearest parts of Italy. But as the wind 
was in the south and they were unacquainted with 
those regions, they were carried too far out to sea 
and landed at one of the mouths of the Po called 
the Spinetic mouth. In that very place they left their 
ships and such of their people as were least able 
to bear hardships, placing a guard over the ships, 
to the end that, if their affairs did not prosper, 
they might be sure of a retreat. Those who were 
left behind there surrounded their camp with a 
wall and brought in plenty of provisions in their 
ships; and when their affairs seemed to prosper 
satisfactorily, they built a city and called it by the 
same name as the mouth of the river. These 
people attained to a greater degree of prosperity 
than any others who dwelt on the Ionian Gulf; for 
they had the mastery at sea for a long time, and 


1This is the form of the name given by Diodorus 
(v. 81) and others; the son’s name usually appears as 
Macareus. 

2 In reality it was, of course, the town Spina that gave 
its name to the ostium Spineticum, 


59 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ ὃ / > 4 rv A bend ~ A ~ el ~ > A 

καὶ δεκάτας εἰς Δελφοὺς ἀνῆγον τῷ θεῷ" τῶν ἀπὸ 

- / >] ~ ” \ \ Μ 
τῆς θαλάττης ὠφελειῶν, εἴπερ τινὲς καὶ ἄλλοι, 
λαμπροτάτας. ὕστερον μέντοι μεγάλῃ χειρὶ τῶν 
προσοικούντων βαρβάρων ἐπιστρατευσάντων αὐτοῖς 
ἐξέλιπον τὴν πόλιν οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι μετὰ χρόνον 
ἀνέστησαν ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων. καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐν τῷ 
Σπινῆτι καταλειφθὲν γένος τῶν []ελασγῶν οὕτως 
ἐφθάρη. 
ε ~ / 

XIX. Οἱ δὲ διὰ τῆς μεσογείου τραπόμενοι, τὴν 
> \ ~ > / «ε / > \ > 
ὀρεινὴν τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας ὑπερβαλόντες, εἰς τὴν ᾿᾽Ομβρι- 
κῶν ἀφικνοῦνται χώραν τῶν ὁμορούντων ᾿Αβοριγῖσι. 
πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα χωρία τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας ᾧκουν ᾽Ομ- 

S ~ > A 
βρικοί, Kat ἦν τοῦτο τὸ ἔθνος ἐν τοῖς πάνυ μέγα τε 
~ Φ᾿ 3 > ¢ 
Kal ἀρχαῖον. τὸ μὲν οὖν κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς ἐκράτουν ot 
~ ~ 3 
Πελασγοὶ τῶν χωρίων ἔνθα τὸ πρῶτον ἱδρύσαντο 
καὶ πολισμάτια τῶν ᾿Ομβρικῶν κατελάβοντό τινα" 
συνελθόντος δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς μεγάλου στρατοῦ δεί- 
~ / \ ~ > \ > / 
σαντες τῶν πολεμίων TO πλῆθος εἰς τὴν ABoptyi- 
\ ¢€ \ > ~ 
νων ἀπιόντες τρέπονται. καὶ ot μὲν ᾿Αβοριγῖνες 
ἅτε πολεμίοις ἐδικαίουν αὐτοῖς προσφέρεσθαι καὶ 
συνήεσαν ἐκ τῶν ἔγγιστα χωρίων διὰ τάχους ὡς 
ἐξαναστήσοντες αὐτούς. οἱ δὲ Π]ελασγοί (τυγ- 
χάνουσι γὰρ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ κατὰ δαίμονα περὶ 
/ / > / > 4 / 
Κοτυλίαν πόλιν ABopryivwy αὐλισάμενοι πλησίον 
΄ ~ \ ~ 
τῆς ἱερᾶς λίμνης) ws bn? τήν τε νησῖδα τὴν ἐν 
΄- ‘ - 
αὐτῇ περιδινουμένην κατέμαθον καὶ παρὰ τῶν 
~ ~ ll 
αἰχμαλώτων, os ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν ἔλαβον, ἤκουσαν 
΄ 7 
τὸ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων ὄνομα, τέλος ἔχειν σφίσι τὸ 
1 καὶ after θεῷ deleted by Reiske. 
*§ Ambrosch: δὲ O, Jacoby; deleted by Reudler. 


60 


BOOK I. 18, 4-19, 2 


out of their revenues from the sea they used to 
send tithes to the god at Delphi, which were among 
the most magnificent sent by any people. But 
later, when the barbarians in the neighbourhood 
made war upon them in great numbers, they de- 
serted the city; and these barbarians in the course 
of time were driven out by the Romans. So perished 
that part of the Pelasgians that was left at Spina. 
XIX. Those, however, who had turned inland 
crossed the mountainous part of Italy and came 
to the territory of the Umbrians who were neigh- 
bours to the Aborigines. (The Umbrians inhabited 
a great many other parts of Italy also and were 
an exceeding great and ancient people.) At first 
the Pelasgians made themselves masters of the 
lands where they first settled and took some of the 
small towns belonging to the Umbrians. But when 
a great army came together against them, they 
were terrified at the number of their enemies and 
betook themselves to the country of the Aborigines. 
And these, seeing fit to treat them as enemies, made 
haste to assemble out of the places nearest at hand, 
in order to drive them out of the country. But the 
Pelasgians luckily chanced to be encamped at that 
time near Cutilia, a city of the Aborigines hard by the 
sacred lake, and observing the little island circling 
round in it and learning from the captives they had 
taken in the fields the name of the inhabitants, 
they concluded that their oracle was now fulfilled. 


61 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


3 θεοπρόπιον ὑπέλαβον. ὁ yap ev Δωδώνῃ γενό- 
᾽ / 4 A / / 1 

μενος αὐτοῖς χρησμός, ov φησι Λεύκιος Maddvos 
> > a ~ ~ 
ἀνὴρ οὐκ ἄσημος αὐτὸς ἰδεῖν ἐπί τινος τῶν ἐν τῷ 
τεμένει τοῦ Διὸς κειμένων τριπόδων γράμμασιν 
> 
ἀρχαίοις ἐγκεχαραγμένον, wo. εἶχε" 


- > 
στείχετε μαιόμενοι Σικελῶν ? Σατόρνιον 38 αἶαν 


ἠδ᾽ Αβοριγινέων Κοτύλην, οὗ νᾶσος ὀχεῖται" 
οἷς ἀναμιχθέντες δεκάτην ἐκπέμψατε Φοίβῳ 

‘ A , 4 \ ~ \ ΄ ~ 
καὶ κεφαλὰς Kpovidn! καὶ τῷ πατρὶ πέμπετε φῶτα. 


3 ~ A - > “- \ ~ 
bate ἃ ᾿Ελθοῦσι δὴ τοῖς “βοριγῖσι σὺν πολλῇ 
στρατιᾷ ἱκετηρίας οἱ [Πελασγοὶ προτείνοντες ὁμόσε 
χωροῦσιν ἄνοπλοι φράζοντές τε τὰς ἑαυτῶν τύχας 
\ / \ U / ~ / 
καὶ δεόμενοι πρὸς φιλίαν δέξασθαι σφᾶς συνοίκους 
οὐ λυπηροὺς ἐσομένους, ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸ δαιμόνιον 
αὐτοὺς εἰς τήνδε μόνην ἄγει τὴν χώραν, ἐξηγού- 
2 μενοι τὸ λόγιον. τοῖς δὲ ‘ABopryior ταῦτα πυθο- 
/ 99 7 Θ θ ~ θ / ‘ ~ 
μένοις ἐδόκει πείθεσθαι τῷ θεοπροπίῳ καὶ λαβεῖν 
/ ¢ \ \ ~ / / 
συμμαχίαν ᾿Ελληνικὴν κατὰ τῶν διαφόρων σφίσι 
βαρβάρων, καταπονουμένοιςϑ τῷ πρὸς τοὺς Σικελοὺς 
/ / / \ \ A \ 
πολέμῳ. σπένδονταί te δὴ πρὸς τοὺς [Π]ελασγοὺς 


1Sylburg: μάμιος AB. 2 σικελοὶ AB. 

8 Sylburg, σατούρνιον Macrobius: σατορνίαν A, σατουρνίαν B. 
4 κρονίδῃ O: ἅδῃ Macrobius. 

5 Cobet: πονουμένοις O. 





10Or Manlius. Nothing is known of the man beyond 
what may be inferred from the present passage. 

2A poetic variant of Cotylia, the Greek form of Cutilia. 

3 Varro’s version of this story is quoted by Macrobius 
(i. 7, 28 ff.). In the last verse of the oracle he has “Ady for 


62 


BOOK I. 19, 3-20, 2 


For this oracle, which had been delivered to them in 
Dodona and which Lucius Mallius,! no obscure man, 
says he himself saw engraved in ancient characters 
upon one of the tripods standing in the precinct of 
Zeus, was as follows: 


*“ Fare forth the Sicels’ Saturnian land to seek, 
Aborigines’ Cotylé,? too, where floats an isle ; 
With these men mingling, to Phoebus send a 

tithe, 
And heads to Cronus’ son, and send to the sire 
a man.” 3 


XX. When, therefore, the Aborigines advanced 
with a numerous army, the Pelasgians approached un- 
armed with olive branches in their hands, and telling 
them of their own fortunes, begged that they would 
receive them in a friendly manner to dwell with 
them, assuring them that they would not be trouble- 
some, since Heaven itself was guiding them into 
this one particular country according to the oracle, 
which they explained to them. When the Aborigi- 
nes heard this, they resolved to obey the oracle and 
to gain these Greeks as allies against their bar- 
barian enemies, for they were hard pressed by 
their war with the Sicels. They accordingly made 
a treaty with the Pelasgians and assigned to them 


Kpovidn. He says the oracle was at first taken to call for 
human heads as an offering to Dis and the sacrifice of 
men to Saturn. But several generations later Hercules 
taught the people a more humane interpretation: to 
Dis they should offer little images made in the likeness of 
men and Saturn should be honoured with lighted candles, 
since φῶτα meant “ light’ as well as ‘“‘ man.”’ 


63 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


καὶ διδόασιν αὐτοῖς χωρία τῆς ἑαυτῶν ἀποδασά- 
μενοι τὰ περὶ τὴν ἱερὰν λίμνην, ἐν οἷς ἦν τὰ πολλὰ 
ἑλώδη, ἃ νῦν κατὰ τὸν ἀρχαῖον τῆς διαλέκτου τρόπον 
Οὐέλια ὀνομάζεται. σύνηθες γὰρ ἦν τοῖς ἀρχαίοις 
Ἕλλησιν ὡς τὰ πολλὰ προτιθέναι τῶν ὀνομάτων, 
ὁπόσων αἱ ἀρχαὶ ἀπὸ φωνηέντων ἐγίνοντο, τὴν ov 
συλλαβὴν evi στοιχείῳ γραφομένην. τοῦτο δ᾽ ἢν 
ὥσπερ γάμμα διτταῖς ἐπὶ μίαν ὀρθὴν ἐπιζευγνύμενον 
ταῖς πλαγίοις, ὡς FeAévn καὶ Ράναξ καὶ Fotkos 
καὶ Féap' καὶ πολλὰ τοιαῦτα. ἔπειτα μοῖρά τις 
αὐτῶν οὐκ ἐλαχίστη, ὡς ἡ γῆ πᾶσιν οὐκ ἀπέχρη, 
πείσαντες τοὺς ‘APopryivas συνάρασθαί σῴφισ' τῆς 
ἐξόδου στρατεύουσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς ᾿Ομβρικοὺς καὶ πόλιν 
αὐτῶν εὐδαίμονα καὶ μεγάλην ἄφνω προσπεσόντες 
αἱροῦσι “Κρότωνα - ταύτῃ φρουρίῳ καὶ ἐπιτειχίσματι 
κατὰ τῶν ᾿Ομβρικῶν χρώμενοι, κατεσκευασμένῃ τε 
ὡς ἔρυμα εἶναι πολέμου ἀποχρώντως καὶ χώραν 
ἐχούσῃ τὴν πέριξ εὔβοτον, πολλῶν καὶ ἄλλων 
ἐκράτησαν χωρίων τοῖς τε Αβοριγῖσι τὸν πρὸς τοὺς 
Σικελοὺς πόλεμον ἔτι συνεστῶτα πολλῇ προθυμίᾳ 
συνδιέφερον, ἕως ἐξήλασαν αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῆς σφετέ- 
ρας. καὶ πόλεις πολλάς, τὰς μὲν οἰκουμένας καὶ 
πρότερον ὑπὸ τῶν Σικελῶν, τὰς δ᾽ αὐτοὶ κατα- 
σκευάσαντες, ᾧκουν οἱ Πελασγοὶ κοινῇ μετὰ τῶν 
Apoprywwv, ὧν ἐστιν ἥ τε Καιρητανῶν πόλις, 
Ἄγυλλα δὲ τότε καλουμένη, καὶ [Πίσα καὶ Σατορνία 


1 Féap Cary, Εαρὴν Naber: ἀὴρ B(?), Jacoby, βάνὴρ A. 





1This letter, vau, later called digamma, has actually 
been found in numerous early inscriptions from various 


64 


BOOK TI. 20, 2-5 


some of their own lands that lay near the sacred 
lake; the greater part of these were marshy and 
are still called Velia, in accordance with the ancient 
form of their language. For it was the custom of 
the ancient Greeks generally to place before those 
words that began with a vowel the syllable ov, 
written with one letter (this was like a gamma, 
formed by two oblique lines joined to one upright 
line), as βελένη, Favaé, Ροῖκος, Féap and many 
such words.! Afterwards, a considerable part of the 
Pelasgians, as the land was not sufficient to support 
them all, prevailed on the Aborigines to join them in 
an expedition against the Umbrians, and marching 
forth, they suddenly fell upon and captured Croton, a 
rich and large city of theirs. And using this place 
as a stronghold and fortress against the Umbrians, 
since it was sufficiently fortified as a place of de- 
fence in time of war and had fertile pastures lying 
round it, they made themselves masters also of a 
great many other places and with great zeal assisted 
the Aborigines in the war they were still engaged 
in against the Sicels, till they drove them out of 
their country. And the Pelasgians in common 
with the Aborigines settled many cities, some of 
which had been previously inhabited by the Sicels 
and others which they built themselves; among these 
are Caere, then called Agylla, and Pisae, Saturnia, 
parts of Greece; its value was that of the Latin v. or 
English w. See Kihner-Blass, Griech. Gram. i. 1, καὶ 16 f. 
Dionysius assumes that Velia is an early form of ἕλεια 


(“marshy”). In his day the Latin v was usually repre- 
sented in Greek by ov, sometimes by β. 
69 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


καὶ ἌἌλσιον καὶ ἄλλαι τινὲς, ἃς ava χρόνον ὑπὸ 
Τυρρηνῶν ἀφῃρέθησαν. 

ΧΧΙ. Φαλέριον δὲ καὶ Φασκέννιον ἔτι καὶ εἰς 
ἐμὲ ἦσαν οἰκούμεναι ὑπὸ Ρωμαίων, μίκρ᾽ ἄττα δια- 
σώζουσαι ζώπυρα τοῦ []ελασγικοῦ γένους, Σικελῶν 
ὑπάρχουσαι πρότερον. ἐν ταύταις διέμεινε πολλὰ 
τῶν ἀρχαίων διαιτημάτων, οἷς τὸ ᾿λληνικόν ποτ᾽ 
ἐχρήσατο, ἐπὶ μήκιστον χρόνον, οἷον 6 τε τῶν 
ὅπλων τῶν πολεμιστηρίων κόσμος, ἀσπίδες ‘Apyo- 
λικαὶ καὶ δόρατα, καὶ ὁπότε πολέμου ἄρχοντες ἢ 
τοὺς ἐπιόντας ἀμυνόμενοι στρατὸν ὑπερόριον " ἀπο- 
στέλλοιεν ἱεροί τινες ἄνδρες ἄνοπλοι πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων 
ἰόντες σπονδοφόροι, τῶν τε ἱερῶν αἱ κατασκευαὶ 
καὶ τὰ ἔδη τῶν θεῶν ἁγισμοί τε καὶ θυσίαι καὶ 
πολλὰ τοιαῦτα ἕτερα. πάντων δὲ περιφανέστατον 
μνημεῖον τῆς ἐν Ἄργει ποτὲ οἰκήσεως τῶν ἀνθρώ- 
πων ἐκείνων οἱ τοὺς Σικελοὺς ἐξήλασαν, ὁ τῆς 
ἽἭΡρας νεὼς ἐν Φαλερίῳ κατεσκευασμένος ὡς ἐν 
Ἄργει, ἔνθα καὶ τῶν θυηπολιῶν 6 τρόπος ὅμοιος 
ἦν καὶ γυναῖκες ἱεραὶ θεραπεύουσαι τὸ τέμενος ἥ 
τε λεγομένη κανηφόρος ἁγνὴ γάμων παῖς καταρ- 
χομένη τῶν θυμάτων χοροί τε παρθένων ὑμνουσῶν 
τὴν θεὸν φδαῖς πατρίοις. ἔσχον δέ τινα καὶ 
οὗτοι τῶν καλουμένων Καμπανῶν εὐβότων πάνυ 
καὶ τὴν ὄψιν ἡδίστων πεδίων οὐκ ἐλαχίστην μοῖραν, 
ἔθνος τι βαρβαρικὸν Αὐρωνίσσους ὃ ἐκ μέρους ἀνα- 


1 ὑπερόριον Kiessling: ὑπὲρ τῶν ὅρων O. 
5 Αὐρώγκους or Αὐρούγ΄.ους Sylburg, Portus. 





1 The /etiales ; see il. 72. 


66 


BOOK I. 20, 5-21, 3 


Alsium and some others, of which they were in the 
course of time dispossessed by the Tyrrhenians. 
XXI. But Falerii and Fescennium were even 
down to my day inhabited by Romans and pre- 
served some small remains of the Pelasgian nation, 
though they had earlier belonged to the Sicels. In 
these cities there survived for a very long time 
many of the ancient customs formerly in use among 
the Greeks, such as the fashion of their arms of 
war, like Argolic bucklers and spears; and whenever 
they sent out an army beyond their borders, either 
to begin a war or to resist an invasion, certain holy 
men, unarmed, went ahead of the rest bearing the 
terms of peace!; similar, also, were the struc¢ure 
of their temples, the images of their gods, their 
purifications and sacrifices and many other things 
of that nature. But the most conspicuous monu- 
ment which shows that those people who drove out 
the Sicels once lived at Argos is the temple of Juno 
at Falerii, built in the same fashion as the one 
at Argos; here, too, the manner of the sacrificial 
ceremonies was similar, holy women served the 
sacred precinct, and an unmarried girl, called the 
canephorus or “* basket-bearer,” performed the initial 
rites of the sacrifices, and there were choruses of vir- 
gins who praised the goddess in the songs of their 
country. These people also possessed themselves 
of no inconsiderable part of the Campanian plains, 
as they are called, which afford not only very 
fertile pasturage but most pleasing prospects as 
well, having driven the Auronissi,? a barbarous 


*The name occurs nowhere else and is very probably 
a corruption of Aurunci. 


67 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


στήσαντες αὐτῶν καὶ πόλεις αὐτόθι κατεσκεύασαν 
ΓΚ \ A 4 1 3... A > / 
ἄλλας te καὶ Adpioav! ἐπὶ τῆς ἐν ]Π]ελοποννήσῳ 
σφῶν μητροπόλεως ὄνομα θέμενοι αὐτῆ. τῶν μὲν 
> " , ” a \ ΄ > az 
οὖν ἄλλων πολισμάτων ἔστιν ἃ Kal μέχρις ἐμοῦ 
> Ἁ > ΄, / \ > / ε 
ὀρθὰ ἦν, διαμείψαντα πολλάκις τοὺς οἰκήτορας - ἡ 
δὲ Adpioa ἐκ πολλῶν πάνυ χρόνων ἐρημωθεῖσα 
δ᾽ > / > 40 2 / \ δὲ 
οὐδ᾽ εἰ πώποτε φὠκήθη “ γνώρισμα φανερὸν οὐδὲν 
ἔχει τοῖς νῦν ὅτι μὴ τοὔνομα, καὶ οὐδὲ τοῦτο πολλοὶ 
” δ» \ > ~ ΄ ‘ > 
ἴσασιν. ἦν δὲ ἀγορᾶς Π]οπιλίας καλουμένης οὐ 
πρόσω. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα τῆς τε παραθαλαττίου 
> ~ > 
Kal ἐν τῇ μεσογείῳ χωρία κατέσχον ἀφελόμενοι 
τοὺς Σικελούς. 
” > 
XXII. Οἱ δὲ Σικελοὶ (οὐ yap ἔτι ἀντέχειν οἷοί 
Ss ε / ~ Ae? / 4 
te ἦσαν ὑπό Te Π]}ελασγῶν καὶ APoprytvwv πολεμού- 
μενοι) τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ τῶν χρημάτων ὅσα 
Ὑ Ss > 
χρυσὸς ἢ ἄργυρος ἦν ἀνασκευασάμενοι μεθίενται 
αὐτοῖς ἁπάσης τῆς ys. τραπόμενοι δὲ διὰ τῆς 
ὀρεινῆς ἐπὶ τὰ νότια καὶ διεξελθόντες ἅπασαν 
3 / \ / > 57, 40 > 7 
TraXiav τὴν κάτω, ἐπειδὴ πανταχόθεν ἀπηλαύ- 
νοντο, σὺν χρόνῳ κατασκευασάμενοι σχεδίας ἐπὶ 
~ ~ ‘ / / A c a 
τῷ πορθμῷ καὶ φυλάξαντες κατιόντα τὸν ῥοῦν 
5 \ ~ > , / a> § \ Μ ~ 
ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας διέβησαν ἐπὶ τὴν ἔγγιστα νῆσον. 
- ᾽ 
κατεῖχον δ᾽ αὐτὴν Σικανοί, γένος ᾿Ιβηρικόν, οὐ 
πολλῷ πρότερον ἐνοικισάμενοι ὃ Λίγυας φεύγοντες, 
και παρεσκεύασαν ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν Σικανίαν κληθῆναι 
~ > 
τὴν νῆσον. Τρινακρίαν πρότερον ὀνομαζομένην ἐπὶ 


'Ritschi: λάρισσαν Ὁ (and similarly elsewhere), 
* Kiessling: φκίσθη O. 
® Cobet: συνοικησάμενοι AB. 


68 


BOOK I. 21, 3-22, 2 


nation, out of part of them. There they built 
various other cities and also Larisa, which they 
named after their mother-city in the Peloponnesus, 
Some of these cities were standing even to my day, 
having often changed their inhabitants. But Larisa 
has been long deserted and shows to the people 
of to-day no other sign of its ever having been 
inhabited but its name,’ and even this is not gener- 
ally known. It was not far from the place called 
Forum Popilii.2. They also occupied a great many 
other places, both on the coast and in the interior, 
which they had taken from the Sicels. 

XXII. The Sicels, being warred upon by both 
the Pelasgians and the Aborigines, found themselves 
incapable of making resistance any longer, and so, 
taking with them their wives and children and such 
of their possessions as were of gold or silver, they 
abandoned all their country to these foes. Then, 
turning their course southward through the moun- 
tains, they proceeded through all the lower part of 
Italy, and being driven away from every place, 
they at last prepared rafts at the Strait and, watching 
for a downward current, passed over from Italy to 
the adjacent island. It was then occupied by the 
Sicanians, an Iberian nation, who, fleeing from the 
Ligurians, had but lately settled there and had caused 


the island, previously named Trinacria, from its 


1 Larisa originally meant ‘“ citadel.’” Places with this 
name, of which there were several in Greece and Asia, 
seem to have been of Pelasgic origin. 

* This Forum Popilii was in the Falernian district at the 
northern end of the Campanian plain, a few miles south of 
Teanum., 


69 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ / / = δὲ > dA \ > 
τοῦ τριγώνου σχήματος. ἦσαν δὲ οὐ πολλοὶ ve 
/ " ΄ > / > > ε / ~ / 
μεγάλῃ αὐτῇ οἰκήτορες, ἀλλ ἡ πλείων τῆς χώρας 
> » Ὁ 
ἔτι ἦν ἔρημος. καταχθέντες οὖν εἰς αὐτὴν Σικελοὶ 
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐν τοῖς ἑσπερίοις μέρεσιν ᾧκησαν, 
»” A + ΄σ. εἶ A ε ~ pte 
ἔπειτα καὶ ἄλλῃ πολλαχῇ, Kal τοὔνομα ἡ νῆσος ἐπὶ 
΄ ” / A \ \ \ 
τούτων ἤρξατο Σικελία καλεῖσθαι. τὸ μὲν 
5 
Σικελικὸν γένος οὕτως ἐξέλιπεν ᾿Ιταλίαν, ὡς μὲν 
“Ελλάνικος 6 “έσβιός φησι, τρίτῃ γενεᾷ πρότερον 
7~ ~ > 
τῶν Τρωικῶν Adkudvns ἱερωμένης ev Ἄργει κατὰ 
\ - 
τὸ ἕκτον καὶ εἰκοστὸν ἔτος. δύο δὲ! ποιεῖ στόλους 
\ 
᾿Ιταλικοὺς διαβάντας εἰς Σικελίαν: τὸν μὲν πρό- 
> > / > 
τερον ᾿Ελύμων, οὕς φησιν ὑπ᾽ Οἰνώτρων ἐξανα- 
~ ~ ” , 
στῆναι, τὸν δὲ μετὰ τοῦτον ἔτει πέμπτῳ γενόμενον 
> / > / / λέ δὲ / : 
Αὐσόνων ᾿Ϊάπυγας φευγόντων βασιλέα δὲ τούτων 
> > - - 3 
ἀποφαίνει LikeAdv, ἀφ᾽ οὗ τοὔνομα τοῖς τε ἀνθρώ- 
=~ ~ e \ / « 
ποις καὶ τῇ νήσῳ τεθῆναι. ὡς δὲ Φίλιστος 6 
Συρακούσιος ypader,” χρόνος μὲν τῆς διαβάσεως 
ἣν ἔτος ὀγδοηκοστὸν πρὸ τοῦ Τρωικοῦ πολέμου, 
¥ » » » , 
ἔθνος δὲ τὸ διακομισθὲν ἐξ ᾿Ιταλίας οὔτε Αὐσό- 
3 / ” 
νων 3 οὔτ᾽ ᾿Ελύμων, ἀλλὰ Atytwv, ἄγοντος αὐτοὺς 
1 δὲ added by Ritschl. * Kiessling: ἔγραψε O, Jacoby. 
8 Before οὔτε Atoovwy Stephanus inserted οὔτε Σικελῶν. 
"es: Beton τὰ 
Kiessling was the first editor to bracket these words, which 
appear in none of the MSS. By a strange inadvertence 


Jacoby replaced them in the text, attributing them to 
Kiessling ! 





1 Hellanicus (fifth century), the most prominent of the 
logographers, wrote histories of various Greek lands, in- 
cluding an Atthis for Attica and a Phoronis for Argos 
(cf. chap. 28, 3), as well as accounts of the Trojan ex- 
pedition and the Persian invasion. He also compiled some 
chronological lists, such as The Priestesses of Hera at Argos 


70 


BOOK I. 22, 2-4 


triangular shape, to be called Sicania, after them- 
selves. There were very few inhabitants in it for so 
large an island, and the greater part of it was as yet 
unoccupied. Accordingly, when the Sicels landed 
there they first settled in the western parts and 
afterwards in several others ; and from these people 
the island began to be called Sicily. In this manner 
the Sicel nation left Italy, according to Hellani- 
cus of Lesbos,! in the third generation before the 
Trojan war, and in the twenty-sixth year of the 
priesthood of Aleyoné at Argos.? But he says that 
two Italian expeditions passed over into Sicily, the 
first consisting of the Elymians, who had_ been 
driven out of their country by the Oenotrians, and 
the second, five years later, of the Ausonians, who 
fled from the lapygians. As king of the latter 
group he names Sicelus, from whom both the people 
and the island got their name. But according to 
Philistus of Syracuse ® the date of the crossing was 
the eightieth year before the Trojan war? and the 
people who passed over from Italy were neither 
Ausonians nor Elymians, but Ligurians, whose 


(cf. chap. 72, 2), with the apparent purpose of devising 
a scientific chronology. The present quotation appears 
as irg. 53 in Miller, F.H.G.i. p. 52. 

* Probably in the second quarter of the thirteenth cen- 
tury B.c.; but it is not certain that Hellanicus is here 
using the generation as a definite measure of time (usually 
reckoned as one-third of a century). Unfortunately the 
date of Aleyoné’s priesthood is not known. 

3 Philistus (first half of fourth century) stood high in the 
counsels of the elder Dionysius, for a time, and particularly 
of the younger Dionysius. He was famous for his history 
of Sicily, which closely imitated the style of Thucydides. 
Miller, F.H.G. i. p. 185, frg. 2. 4 ca, 1263 B.C. 


71 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Σικελοῦ: τοῦτον δ᾽ εἶναί φησιν υἱὸν ᾿Ϊταλοῦ, 
καὶ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐπὶ τούτου δυναστεύοντος 
> ~ / > ~ > > ~ 
ὀνομασθῆναι Σικελούς: ἐξαναστῆναι δ᾽ ἐκ τῆς 
¢ ~ \ / ¢ / > ~ \ 
ἑαυτῶν τοὺς Atyvas ὑπό te ᾽Ομβρικῶν καὶ ITeAac- 
γῶν. Ἀντίοχος δὲ 6 Συρακούσιος χρόνον μὲν οὐ 
- - / \ \ \ 
δηλοῖ τῆς διαβάσεως, Σικελοὺς δὲ τοὺς μετ- 
/ > / / e / ᾿] ͵ 
αναστάντας ἀποφαίνει βιασθέντας ὑπό τε Οἰνώτρων 
\ gb, ~ > Ψ 1 δ᾽ "5. / ~ > / 
καὶ ᾿Οπικῶν, Στράτωνα ἡγεμόνα τῆς ἀποικίας 
Ξ Θ δίδης δὲ Σικελοὺς μὲν εἶ 
ποιησαμένους. ουκυδίδης δὲ Σικελοὺς μὲν εἶναι 
γράφει τοὺς μεταναστάντας, ᾿Οπικοὺς δὲ τοὺς 
> / \ \ / A yA ~ 
ἐκβαλόντας, τὸν δὲ χρόνον πολλοῖς ἔτεσι τῶν 
Τρωικῶν ὕστερον. τὰ μὲν δὴ περὶ Σικελῶν λεγό- 
μενα τῶν ἐξ ᾿Ιταλίας μετενεγκαμένων τὴν οἴκησιν 
> / e \ ~ ’ > / / > / 
eis Σικελίαν ὑπὸ τῶν λόγου ἀξίων τοιάδε ἐστίν. 
XXIII. Οἱ δὲ Πελασγοὶ πολλῆς καὶ ἀγαθῆς 
χώρας κρατήσαντες, πόλεις τε πολλὰς μὲν παρα- 
λαβόντες,3 ἄλλας δ᾽ αὐτοὶ κατασκευάσαντες, με- 
͵7 A ~ > / »Μ > » ΄ 
γάλην καὶ ταχεῖαν ἐπίδοσιν ἔλαβον εἰς εὐανδρίαν 
i .. \ \ Μ » / e » A 
καὶ πλοῦτον Kai τὴν ἄλλην εὐτυχίαν, ἧς οὐ πολὺν 
ὥὦναντο χρόνον᾽ ἀλλ᾽ ἡνίκα μάλιστα τοῖς σύμπασιν 
ἀνθεῖν ἐδόκουν, δαιμονίοις τισὶ χόλοις ἐλαστρη- 
θέντες οἱ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν θείων συμφορῶν, οἱ δὲ ὑπὸ 
qn ͵ / > 7 \ \ 
τῶν προσοικούντων βαρβάρων ἐξεφθάρησαν, τὸ δὲ 
~ > ~ / > \ « "4 \ \ 
πλεῖστον αὐτῶν μέρος εἰς τὴν ᾿Ελλάδα καὶ τὴν 
" 50 > Sdéc8 . 4 . " 
βάρβαρον αὖθις ἐσκεδάσθη (περὶ ὧν πολὺς ἂν εἴη 
/ > ΄ \ > / 4 > / 
λόγος, εἰ βουλοίμην τὴν ἀκρίβειαν γράφειν), ὀλίγον 
1 Στράτωνα Urlichs, [Jatpwva Bernays, Συράκωνα Reiske: 
arpatav O. 
2 δ᾽ added by Reiske. 


Smohers . παραλαβόντες AMbrosch: πόλεις τε παρέλαβον 
(προσέλαβον A) BA, 


72 


BOOK I. 22, 4-23, 1 


leader was Sicelus; this Sicelus, he says, was 
the son of Italus and in his reign the people were 
ealled Sicels, and he adds that these Ligurians had 
been driven out of their country by the Umbrians 
and Pelasgians. Antiochus of Syracuse! does not 
give the date of the crossing, but says the people 
who migrated were the Sicels, who had been forced 
to leave by the Oenotrians and Opicans, and that 
they chose Straton? as leader of the colony. But 
Thucydides writes 5 that the people who left Italy 
were the Sicels and those who drove them out the 
Opicans, and that the date was many years after 
the Trojan war. Such, then, are the reports 
given by credible authorities concerning the Sicels 
who changed their abode from Italy to Sicily. 
XXIII. The Pelasgians, after conquering a large 
and fertile region, taking over many towns and 
building others, made great and rapid progress, 
becoming populous, rich and in every way pros- 
perous. Nevertheless, they did not long enjoy their 
prosperity, but at the moment when they seemed 
to all the world to be in the most flourishing con- 
dition they were visited by divine wrath, and some 
of them were destroyed by calamities inflicted by 
the hand of Heaven, others by their barbarian 
neighbours; but the greatest part of them were 
again dispersed through Greece and the country of 
the barbarians (concerning whom, if 1 attempted 
to give a particular account, it would make a very 


‘See p. 39, n. 2. Miller, F.H.G. i. p. 181, frg. 1. 
* The name rests on conjecture. See critical note. 
A wind: 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ > ~ 
δὲ κατέμεινεν ἐν ᾿Ιταλίᾳ τῶν ABopvyivwy προνοίᾳ. 
ε « 
~ \ S ~ ᾿] - 

2 πρῶτον μὲν οὖν τῆς οἰκοφθορίας ταῖς πόλεσιν 
25 / ᾽ ~ ς ~ θ A ΝΜ er ” > 
ἐδόκει αὐχμῷ ἡ γῆ κακωθεῖσα ἄρξαι, ἡνίκα οὔτ 
> ~ / ~ 
ἐπὶ τοῖς δένδρεσι καρπὸς οὐδεὶς ὡραῖος γενέσθαι 

/ > > » \ / ΜΩ3 ς 4 
διέμεινεν, ἀλλ᾽ ὠμοὶ Katéppeov, οὔθ᾽ ὁπόσα σπερ- 
μάτων ἀνέντα βλαστοὺς ἀνθήσειεν ἕως στάχυος 
ἀκμῆς τοὺς κατὰ νόμον ἐξεπλήρου χρόνους, οὔτε 
πόα κτήνεσιν ἐφύετο διαρκής, τῶν τε ναμάτων τὰ 

, ~ > 3 
μὲν οὐκέτι πίνεσθαι σπουδαῖα ἦν, τὰ δ᾽ ὑπελίμπανε 

8 θέρους, τὰ δ᾽ εἰς τέλος ἀπεσβέννυτο. ἀδελφὰ δὲ 

τούτοις ἐγίνετο περί τε προβάτων καὶ γυναικῶν 
o Ἅ ‘ > ~ Ἁ » “Ἃ \ \ 
yovds’ ἢ yap ἐξημβλοῦτο τὰ ἔμβρυα ἢ κατὰ τοὺς 
τόκους διεφθείρετο ἔστιν ἃ καὶ τὰς φερούσας συν- 
/ > / / κ᾿ > ~ 
διαλυμηνάμενα. εἰ δέ τι διαφύγοι τὸν ἐκ τῶν 

wv “Ἃ > 

ὠδίνων κίνδυνον, ἔμπηρον ἢ ἀτελὲς ἢ δι᾿ ἄλλην. τινὰ 

/ \ / \ ? Ss ” 
τύχην βλαφθὲν τρέφεσθαι χρηστὸν οὐκ ἦν ἔπειτα 

\ \ ΝΜ onl \ > > ~ / > ~ 
καὶ τὸ ἄλλο πλῆθος TO ἐν ἀκμῇ μάλιστα ἐκακοῦτο 
νόσοις καὶ θανάτοις παρὰ τὰ εἰκότα συχνοῖς. 

~ ~ a 

4 μαντευομένοις δ᾽ αὐτοῖς τίνα θεῶν ἢ δαιμόνων 

παραβάντες τάδε πάσχουσι καὶ τί ποιήσασιν αὐτοῖς 

~ \ \ > / - Ἁ > ~ “ ’ 

λωφῆσαι τὰ δεινὰ ἐλπίς, ὁ θεὸς ἀνεῖλεν ὅτι τυχόντες 
= > A 

ὧν ἐβούλοντο οὐκ ἀπέδοσαν ἃ εὔξαντο, ἀλλὰ προσ- 

«ς \ 

δ οφείλουσι τὰ πλείστου ἄξια. ot yap {Πελασγοὶ 

- ,ὔ > ~ ~ / vA 

ἀφορίας αὐτοῖς γενομένης ἐν TH γῇ πάντων χρημά- 

” ~ \ \ ~ ? / \ - 

των εὔξαντο τῷ τε Ati καὶ τῷ Ἀπόλλωνι καὶ τοῖς 





1 Similar calamities are mentioned, much more briefly, 
in Sophocles, Oed. Rex 25-27. 


74 


BOOK I. 23, 1-5 


long story), though some few of them remained 
in Italy through the care of the Aborigines. The first 
cause of the desolation of their cities seemed to be 
a drought which laid waste the land, when neither 
any fruit remained on the trees till it was ripe, 
but dropped while still green, nor did such of the 
seed corn as sent up shoots and flowered stand for 
the usual period till the ear was ripe, nor did suffi- 
cient grass grow for the cattle; and of the waters 
some were no longer fit to drink, others shrank during 
the summer, and others were totally dried up. 
And like misfortunes attended the offspring both of 
cattle and of women.! For they were either abortive 
or died at birth, some by their death destroying 
also those that bore them; and if any got safely 
past the danger of their delivery, they were either 
maimed or defective or, being injured by some other 
accident, were not fit to be reared. The rest of the 
people, also, particularly those in the prime of life, 
were afflicted with many unusual diseases and un- 
common deaths. But when they asked the oracle 
what god or divinity they had offended to be thus 
afflicted and by what means they might hope for 
relief, the god answered that, although they had 
obtained what they desired, they had neglected to 
pay what they had promised, and that the things 
of greatest value were still due from them. For the 
Pelasgians in a time of general scarcity in the land 
had vowed to offer? to Jupiter, Apollo and the 


* The verbs καταθύσειν (here) and ἀπέθυσαν (just below) are 
rendered by the ambiguous word “ offer’’; for, though 
both are compounds of θύω (“ἡ sacrifice’’), they sometimes 
mean merely “‘ dedicate’’ or ‘‘ devote,” 


79 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


KaBeipous καταθύσειν δεκάτας τῶν προσγενησο- 
μένων ἁπάντων, τελεσθείσης δὲ τῆς εὐχῆς ἐξελό- 
μενοι καρπῶν τε καὶ βοσκημάτων ἁπάντων τὸ 
λάχος ἀπέθυσαν τοῖς θεοῖς, ὡς δὴ κατὰ τούτων 
μόνων εὐξάμενοι. ταῦτα δὴ Μυρσίλος ὁ Λέσβιος 
ἱστόρηκεν ὀλίγου δεῖν τοῖς αὐτοῖς ὀνόμασι γράφων 
οἷς ἐγὼ νῦν, πλὴν ὅσον οὐ IleAacyovs καλεῖ τοὺς 
ἀνθρώπους ἀλλὰ Τυρρηνούς. τὴν δ᾽ αἰτίαν ὀλίγον 
ὕστερον ἐρῶ. 

XXIV. ‘Qs δὲ ἀπενεχθέντα τὸν χρησμὸν ἔμαθον, 
οὐκ εἶχον τὰ λεγόμενα συμβαλεῖν. ἀμηχανοῦσι δὲ 
αὐτοῖς τῶν γεραιτέρων τις λέγει συμβαλὼν τὸ 
λόγιον, ὅτι τοῦ παντὸς ἡμαρτήκασιν, εἰ οἴονται 
τοὺς θεοὺς ἀδίκως αὐτοῖς ἐγκαλεῖν. χρημάτων 
μὲν γὰρ ἀποδεδόσθαι τὰς ἀπαρχὰς αὐτοῖς ἁπάσας 
ὀρθῶς τε καὶ σὺν δίκῃ, ἀνθρώπων δὲ γονῆς τὸ 
λάχος, χρῆμα παντὸς μάλιστα θεοῖς τιμιώτατον, 
ὀφείλεσθαι. εἰ δὲ δὴ καὶ τούτων λάβοιεν τὴν δικαίαν 
μοῖραν͵ τέλος ἕξειν σφίσι τὸ λόγιον. τοῖς μὲν 
δὴ ὀρθῶς ἐδόκει λέγεσθαι ταῦτα, τοῖς δὲ ἐξ ἐπι- 
βουλῆς συγκεῖσθαι 6 λόγος - εἰσηγησαμένου δέ 
τινος τὴν γνώμην τὸν θεὸν ἐπερέσθαι, εἰ αὐτῷ 
φίλον ἀνθρώπων δεκάτας ἀπολαμβάνειν, πέμπουσι 
τὸ δεύτερον θεοπρόπους καὶ 0 θεὸς ἀνεῖλεν οὕτω 





1 Myrsilus (first half of third century) composed a history 
of Lesbos. This quotation is frg. 2 in Miller, F.H.@. iv. 
pp. 456 f. 2 In chaps. 25 and 29. 

3 In asimilar story related by Strabo (v. 4, 12) the Sabines 
had vowed to dedicate all their increase of the year, and 
learning, as the result of a famine that later befell them, 
that they should have included their children, they dedi- 


716 


BOOK T. 23, 5-24, 2 


Cabeiri tithes of all their future increase; but when 
their prayer had been answered, they set apart and 
offered to the gods the promised portion of all their 
fruits and cattle only, as if their vow had related 
to them alone. This is the account related by Myr- 
silus of Lesbos,! who uses almost the same words 
as I do now, except that he does not call the 
people Pelasgians, but Tyrrhenians, of which I shall 
give the reason a little later.” 

XXIV. When they heard the oracle which was 
brought to them, they were at a loss to guess the 
meaning of the message. While they were in this 
perplexity, one of the elders, conjecturing the sense 
of the saying, told them they had quite missed its 
meaning if they thought the gods complained of 
them without reason. Of material things they had 
indeed rendered to the gods all the first-fruits in 
the right and proper manner, but of human offspring, 
a thing of all others the most precious in the sight 
of the gods, the promised portion still remained 
due; if, however, the gods received their just share of 
this also, the oracle would be satisfied. There were, 
indeed, some who thought that he spoke aright, 
but others felt that there was treachery behind his 
words. And when some one proposed to ask the 
god whether it was acceptable to him to receive 
tithes of human beings, they sent their messengers 
a second time, and the god ordered them so to do.® 


cated these to Mars, and when the children had grown 
up, sent them out as colonists. Dionysius has already 
narrated (in chap. 16) a like procedure on the part of the 
Aborigines. This form of vow, when it involved the in- 
crease of a particular year, was called a ver sacrum, as we 
[Note contini:ed on p. 79. 


7 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ > \ / / 3 \ ’ὔ 
ποιεῖν. ἐκ δὲ τούτου στάσις αὐτοὺς καταλαμβάνει 
4 ~ / ~ / \ > > , 
περὶ τοῦ τρόπου τῆς δεκατεύσεως. καὶ ἐν ἀλλή- 
[ ~ ~ 
λοις of προεστηκότες τῶν πόλεων 7TO1 πρῶτον 
> A ~ > 
ἐταράχθησαν: ἔπειτα Kat τὸ λοιπὸν πλῆθος δι 
« ’ A > / > / > / / 
ὑποψίας τοὺς ἐν τέλει ἐλάμβανεν. ἐγίνοντό τε 
Ps) ‘ / > / 2 > > σ ’ τ 
οὐδενὶ κόσμῳ ἀπαναστάσεις," ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ εἰκὸς 
9 / 
οἴστρῳ καὶ θεοβλαβείᾳ ἀπελαυνόμεναι, Kat πολλὰ 
΄ > ~ 
ἐφέστια ὅλα ἐξηλείφθη μέρους αὐτῶν μεθισταμένου" 
> A > / ε / ~ 9 ~ > 
ov yap ἐδικαίουν οὗ προσήκοντες Tots ἐξιοῦσιν ἀπο- 
, ͵ ~ / \ > ~ > / 
λείπεσθαί τε τῶν φιλτάτων Kai ἐν Tots ἐχθίστοις 
~ A - 
ὑπομένειν. πρῶτοι μὲν δὴ οὗτοι μεταναστάντες 
” \ « / \ ~ ’ὔ 
ἐξ ᾿Ιταλίας εἴς τε τὴν ᾿Ελλάδα καὶ τῆς βαρβάρου 
A >? / \ \ \ 4 hd 
πολλὴν ἐπλανήθησαν. μετὰ δὲ τοὺς πρώτους ἕτεροι 
A 5 ‘3 ” \ ~ ὃ “λ / e / 
τὸ αὐτὸβ ἔπαθον, καὶ τοῦτο διετέλει γινόμενον ὁσέτη. 
5 A - δ ¢ / 7 - / ~ 
ov yap ἀνίεσαν ot δυναστεύοντες ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι τῆς 
> id -» Ss ’ > 4 A > , 
ἀνδρουμένης ἀεὶ νεότητος ἐξαιρούμενοι Tas ἀπαρχάς, 
~ ~ \ / e ~ 3 ~ ‘ 
τοῖς τε θεοῖς τὰ δίκαια ὑπουργεῖν ἀξιοῦντες καὶ 
~ , 
στασιασμοὺς ἐκ τῶν Siadabdvtwy* δεδιότες. ἦν 
‘ ‘ \ \ \ ΝΜ θ \ 4 3 - 
δὲ πολὺ καὶ τὸ πρὸς ἔχθραν σὺν προφάσει εὐπρεπεῖ 
176 Sintenis: τότε O. 
2dmavactacers A: αἱ ἐπαναστάσεις B; ai ἀπαναστάσεις 
Jacoby. 


ὃ τὸ αὐτὸ Ο: ταὐτὸν Jacoby. 


4 διαλαθόντων O: διαλαχόντων Sylburg, ἀεὶ λαχόντων Cobet. 
78 


BOOK I. 24, 2-4 


Thereupon strife arose among them concerning the 
manner of choosing the tithes, and those who had the 
government of the cities first quarrelled among them- 
selves and afterwards the rest of the people held their 
magistrates in suspicion. And there began to be dis- 
orderly emigrations, such as might well be expected 
from a people driven forth by a frenzy and madness 
inflicted by the hand of Heaven. Many households 
disappeared entirely when part of their members left; 
for the relations of those who departed were un- 
willing to be separated from their dearest friends and 
remain among their worst enemies. These, there- 
fore, were the first to migrate from Italy and wander 
about Greece and many parts of the barbarian 
world; but after them others had the same experi- 
ence, and this continued every year. For the rulers 
in the cities ceased not to select the first-fruits of the 
youth as soon as they arrived at manhood, both 
because they desired to render what was due to the 
gods and also because they feared uprisings on the 
part of lurking enemies. Many, also, under specious 


learn from Paulus Diaconus in his abridgment of Festus, 
p- 379. He states that it was a custom of the Italian 
peoples in times of dire peril to vow to sacrifice (immo- 
laturos) all the living things that should be born to them 
during the following spring ; but that, since it seemed to 
them cruel to slay innocent boys and girls, they reared 
these and then drove them forth, with their heads veiled, 
beyond the boundaries. It is not altogether clear in the 
case of the Pelasgians what the fate of the human tithes 
was, whether mere expulsion or actual sacrifice. In 
favour of the former view may be urged the fact # cheir 
respite until they had grown up; yet the violent disturb- 
ances that accompanied the selection of the tithes would 
seem to point to a more cruel fate. 


79 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> / ε \ ~ / σ \ ¢ 
ἀπελαυνόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν διαφόρων: ὥστε πολλαὶ at 
ἀπαναστάσεις ῖ ἐγίνοντο καὶ ἐπὶ πλεῖστον γῆς τὸ 
Πελασγικὸν γένος διεφορήθη. 
XXV. Ἦσαν δὲ τά τε" πολέμια ἐκ τοῦ μετὰ 
/ ~ A / > v 
κινδύνων πεποιῆσθαι τὰς μελέτας ἐν ἔθνεσι φιλο- 
πολέμοις ζῶντες πολλῶν ἀμείνους καὶ τῆς κατὰ τὰ 
ναυτικὰ ἐπιστήμης διὰ τὴν μετὰ Τυρρηνῶν οἴκησιν 
ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἐληλακότες᾽ 85. Te ἀνάγκη ἱκανὴ 
οὖσα τοῖς ἀπορουμένοις βίου τόλμαν παρασχεῖν 
ἡγεμών τε καὶ διδάσκαλος τοῦ παντὸς κινδυνεύ- 
ματος αὐτοῖς ἐγίνετο, ὥστε οὐ χαλεπῶς ὅπη 
> / > / > ~ \ e A ~ 
ἐπέλθοιεν ἐπεκράτουν. ἐκαλοῦντο δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν 
A > ’ὔ - / > / > > φ' 
ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων τῆς τε χώρας ἐπικλήσει ἀφ᾽ ἧς 
~ ~ « 
ἐξανέστησαν καὶ τοῦ παλαιοῦ γένους μνήμῃ οἱ 
> \ \ \ / = > \ / 
αὐτοὶ Τυρρηνοὶ καὶ IleAacyoit. ὧν ἐγὼ λόγον 
ἐποιησάμην τοῦ μή τινα θαῦμα ποιεῖσθαι, ἐπειδὰν 
~ “A > \ \ 
ποιητῶν ἢ συγγραφέων ἀκούῃ τοὺς IleAacyovs 
~ ” 
καὶ Τυρρηνοὺς ὀνομαζόντων, πῶς ἀμφοτέρας ἔσχον 
” ~ 
τὰς ἐπωνυμίας ol αὐτοί. ἔχει yap περὶ αὐτῶν 3 
, \ > ~ "A a5 ~ Θ ,ὔ 
Θουκυδίδης μὲν ἐναργῆῇ Ακτῆς" τῆς Θρᾳκίας 
~ > ~ / / 
μνήμην καὶ τῶν ev αὐτῇ κειμένων πόλεων, ἃς 
> ~ Μ / \ \ ~ 
οἰκοῦσιν ἄνθρωποι δίγλωττοι. περὶ δὲ τοῦ []ελασ- 
~ ” 
γικοῦ ἔθνους ὅδε 6 λόγος - “ἔνι δέ τι καὶ Χαλκιδι- 
,ὔ \ \ - \ ~ \ ~ , 
κόν, τὸ δὲ πλεῖστον []ελασγικὸν τῶν καὶ “ῆμνόν 
1 ἀπαναστάσεις A: ἐπαναστάσεις Β. 
ὅτε piaced after τά by Kiessling: after κινδύνων in B; 
A omits. 


iSteph, ta ἀπολελαυκότες O. 
4 περὶ αὐτῶν A: καὶ περὶ αὐτῶν B; περ αὐτῶν καὶ Ritschl, 


Jacoby. 
80 


BOOK I. 24, 4-25, 3 


pretences were being driven away by their enemies 
through hatred; so that there were many emigra- 
tions and the Pelasgian nation was scattered over 
most of the earth. 

XXY. Not only were the Pelasgians superiar to 
many in warfare, as the result of their training in 
the midst of dangers while they lived among warlike 
nations, but they also rose to the highest proficiency 
in seamanship, by reason of their living with the 
Tyrrhenians ; and Necessity, which is quite suffi- 
cient to give daring to those in want of a livelihood, 
was their leader and director in every dangerous 
enterprise, so that wherever they went they conquered 
without difficulty. And the same people were called 
by the rest of the world both Tyrrhenians and Pelas- 
gians, the former name being from the country out 
of which they had been driven and the latter in 
memory of their ancient origin. I mention this so 
that no one, when he hears poets or historians call 
the Pelasgians Tyrrhenians also, may wonder how 
the same people got both these names. Thus, with 
regard to them, Thucydides has a clear account ! of 
the Thracian Acté and of the cities situated in it, 
which are inhabited by men who speak two lan- 
guages. Concerning the Pelasgian nation these 
are his words: ‘‘ There is also a Chalcidian element 
among them, but the largest element is Pelasgian, 


liv. 109. 





5 ἐναργῆ ἀκτῆς Jacoby: ἐν dpxrm A, ἐν en ea B. 
; ὁ μνήμην Steph.: μνήμηι A, μνήμη B; λέγει yap .-. ἐν 
Ακτῆς τ. Θ. μνήμῃ Sauppe. 
81 
VOL. IL. E 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


4 mote καὶ ᾿Αθήνας οἰκησάντων Τυρρηνῶν. Σο- 
φοκλεῖ δ᾽ ἐν ᾿Ινάχῳ δράματι ἀνάπαιστον ὑπὸ τοῦ 
χοροῦ λεγόμενον πεποίηται ὧδε 


"Ivaxe νᾶτορ, παῖ τοῦ κρηνῶν 
᾿ “ ~ 
πατρὸς, ᾿Ωκεανοῦ, μέγα πρεσβεύων 
“A / ὝἭ / p #5 
pyous te γύαις “Hpas τε πάγοις 
καὶ Τυρσηνοῖσι 5 [Ted ῖ 
ρσηνοῖσι 5 Π]ελασγοῖς. 

δ Τυρρηνίας μὲν γὰρ δὴ ὄνομα τὸν χρόνον ἐκεῖνον 
ἀνὰ τὴν ᾿Ελλάδα ἦν, καὶ πᾶσα ἡ προσεσπέριος 
᾿Ιταλία τὰς κατὰ τὸ ἔθνος ὀνομασίας ἀφαιρεθεῖσα 
τὴν ὃ ἐπίκλησιν ἐκείνην ἐλάμβανεν, ὥσπερ καὶ 3 τῆς 
“Ελλάδος ἄλλῃ τε πολλαχῇ καὶ περὶ τὴν καλουμένην 
νῦν “Πελοπόννησον. ἐγένετο: ἐπὶ γὰρ ἑνὸς τῶν 
οἰκούντων ἐν αὐτῇ ἐθνῶν, τοῦ ᾿Αχαϊκοῦ, καὶ 
σύμπασα χερρόνησος, ἐν ἧ καὶ τὸ Ἀρκαδικὸν καὶ 

A ah | \ \ ἄλλ ‘ “A ΝΜ "A sb 
τὸ ᾿ΪΙωνικὸν καὶ a συχνὰ ἔθνη ἔνεστιν, Ayata 
ὠνομάσθη. 

XXVI. Ὃ δὲ χρόνος ἐν ᾧ τὸ “Πελασγικὸν κα- 
κοῦσθαι ἤρξατο δευτέρα γενεὰ" σχεδὸν πρὸ τῶν 
Τρωικῶν ἐγένετο: διέτεινε δὲ καὶ μετὰ τὰ Τρωικά, 
σ΄ > > / LA \ “0 ΝΜ Ἁ 
ἕως εἰς ἐλάχιστον συνεστάλη τὸ ἔθνος. ἔξω γὰρ 

, ~ > 3 - / > ’ 
Κρότωνος τῆς ἐν ᾿Ομβρικοῖς πόλεως ἀξιολόγου, 
καὶ εἰ δή τι ἄλλο ἐν τῇ ABopryivwy οἰκισθὲν 
ἐτύγχανε, τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν [leAacydv διεφθάρη πολί- 
σματα. ἡ δὲ Κρότων ἄχρι πολλοῦ διαφυλάξασα 
τὸ παλαιὸν σχῆμα χρόνος οὐ πολὺς ἐξ οὗ τήν τε 

1Meineke: νάτορ Ba, γεννάτορ ABb. 
2Meineke: ruppnvois AB. 


8¢7v Ambrosch: καὶ τὴν O. 
*xai added by Reiske. δδευτερα γενεᾶ B. 


82 


BOOK I. 25, 4-26, 1 


belonging to the Tyrrhenians who once inhabited 
Lemnos and Athens.” And Sophocles makes the 
chorus in his drama Inachus speak the following 
anapaestic verses : 


“Ὁ fair-flowing Inachus, of Ocean begot, 
That sire of all waters, thou rulest with might 
O’er the Argive fields and Hera’s hills 
And Tyrrhene Pelasgians also.” } 


For the name of Tyrrhenia was then known through- 
out Greece, and all the western part of Italy was 
called by that name, the several nations of which 
it was composed having lost their distinctive appel- 
lations. The same thing happened to many parts of 
Greece also, and particularly to that part of it which 
is now called the Peloponnesus ; for it was after one 
of the nations that inhabited it, namely the Achaean, 
that the whole peninsula also, in which are comprised 
the Arcadian. the Ionian and many other nations, 
was called Achaia. 

XXVI. The time when the calamities of the 
Pelasgians began was about the second generation 
before the Trojan war; and they continued to 
occur even after that war, till the nation was 
reduced to very inconsiderable numbers. For, 
with the exception of Croton, the important city in 
Umbria,” and any others that they had founded in 
the land of the Aborigines, all the rest of the Pelas- 
gian towns were destroyed. But Croton long pre- 
served its ancient form, having only recently changed 


1 Nauck, T.G.F.*, p. 189, frg. 248. 
2 See chap. 20, 4. 


83 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> / \ \ 3 7 »Μ \ ~ > 
ὀνομασίαν Kal τοὺς οἰκήτορας ἤλλαξε καὶ νῦν ἐστι 
Ῥ, / > / A - δὲ K A / ε 
ὡὠμαίων ἀποικία, καλεῖται δὲ Κορθωνία. οἱ 
~ A ~ 
δὲ τῶν ἐκλιπόντων τὴν χώραν ΠΠ]ελασγῶν κατα- 
/ \ “λ Μ Ae ‘ > ε 
σχόντες τὰς πόλεις ἄλλοι τε πολλοὶ ἦσαν, ὡς 
» « 
ἕκαστοί τισιν ἔτυχον ὁμοτέρμονας τὰς οἰκήσεις 
ἔχοντες, καὶ ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα πλείστας τε καὶ 
/ \ \ 
ἀρίστας Τυρρηνοί. τοὺς δὲ Τυρρηνοὺς ot μὲν 
“oa > ͵ > , Kosei 7 
αὐτόχθονας ᾿Ιταλίας ἀποφαίνουσιν, ot δὲ ἐπήλυδας" 
- ¢ 
καὶ τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν αὐτοῖς ταύτην οἱ μὲν αὐθιγενὲς 
~ + ee, nw > / A 
τὸ ἔθνος ποιοῦντες ἐπὶ τῶν ἐρυμάτων, ἃ πρῶτοι 
~ ~ / / ~ 
τῶν τῇδε οἰκούντων κατεσκευάσαντο, τεθῆναι λέ- 
/ \ ‘ \ ~ 
youvot’ τύρσεις yap Kai παρὰ Τυρρηνοῖς at ev- 
> / > 
τείχιοι Kal στεγαναὶ οἰκήσεις ὀνομάζονται ὥσπερ 
᾿Ἔλλ ἱπὸ δὴ τοῦ j ὑτοῖ 
παρ ησιν. ἀπὸ δὴ τοῦ συμβεβηκότος αὐτοῖς 
~ ~ σ - 
ἀξιοῦσι τεθῆναι τοὔνομα, ὥσπερ καὶ τοῖς ἐν Aaia 
᾽ ~ \ \ \ - 
Μοσσυνοίκοις "1 οἰκοῦσι μὲν yap δὴ κἀκεῖνοι ἐπὶ 
« \ / ε - 
ξυλίνοις ὡσπερὰν πύργοις ὑψηλοῖς σταυρώμασι, 
όσσυνας 2 αὐτὰ καλοῦντες. 
XXVII. Οἱδὲ μετανάστας μυθολογοῦντες αὐτοὺς 
\ > / ε / ~ > 
εἶναι Τυρρηνὸν ἀποφαίνουσιν ἡγεμόνα τῆς ἀποικίας 
> ~ ~ »Μ 
γενόμενον ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ θέσθαι τῷ ἔθνει τοὔνομα" 
~ \ - \ > “~ 
τοῦτον δὲ Λυδὸν εἶναι τὸ γένος ἐκ τῆς πρότερον 
\ / 
Mnovias καλουμένης, παλαιὸν δή τινα μετανάστην 
” . Pe > δ᾽ > A ΄ 2 \ A \ λέ 
ὄντα 3 εἶναι δ᾽ αὐτὸν πέμπτον ἀπὸ Atos, λέγοντες 
ἐκ Διὸ i Γῆς Μάνην * γενέσθαι πρῶ ἕν τῇ YH 
ἐκ Διὸς καὶ ! ἧς Μάνην “ γενεσῦ ρῶτον ἐν TH γῇ 
ταύτῃ βασιλέα: τούτου δὲ καὶ Καλλιρρόης " τῆς 
! τοῖς. . . μοσσυνοίκοις B: rods . . . μοσυνοίκους A. 
Σμόσσυνας B: μόσυνας R. 
ὃ μετανάστην ὄντα Sintenis: μεταναστάντα O. 


4Sylburg: μάσνην O (and similarly in § 3). 
*Cary: Καλλιρόης O, Jacoby. 


BOOK I. 26, 1-27, 1 


both its name and inhabitants; it is now a Roman 
colony, called Corthonia.! After the Pelasgians left 
the country their cities were seized by the various 
peoples which happened to live nearest them in 
each case, but chiefly by the Tyrrhenians, who made 
themselves masters of the greatest part and the best 
of them. As regards these Tyrrhenians, some de- 
clare them to be natives of Italy, but others call 
them foreigners. ‘Those who make them a native 
race say that their name was given them from the 
forts, which they were the first of the inhabitants 
of this country to build; for covered buildings 
enclosed by walls are called by the Tyrrhenians as 
well as by the Greeks tyrseis or “‘ towers.” 2 So they 
will have it that they received their name from this 
circumstance in like manner as did the Mossynoeci 3 
in Asia; for these also live in high wooden palisades 
resembling towers, which they call mossynes. 
XXVIII. But those who relate a legendary tale 
about their having come from a foreign land say 
that Tyrrhenus, who was the leader of the colony, 
gave his name to the nation, and that he was a Lydian 
by birth, from the district formerly called Maeonia, 
and migrated in ancient times. They add that he 
was the fifth in descent from Zeus; for they say the 
son of Zeus and Gé was Manes, the first king of that 
country, and his son by Callirrhoé, the daughter 


17.e. Cortona. Compare the name Corythus used by 
Virgil (Aen. iii. 170). 

*The form Tyrrhénoi is the Attic development of 
Tyrsénot, the form used by most of the Greeks. 

3 This people lived on the shore of the Euxine, a short 
distance west of Trapezus. Xenophon mentions them in 
the Anabasis (v. 4). 


89 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


᾿Ωκεανοῦ θυγατρὸς γεννηθῆναι Κότυν: τῷ δὲ Κότυϊ 

᾿ς / / ~ ~ « / / 
γήμαντι θυγατέρα Τύλλου τοῦ γηγενοῦς Ἁλίην δύο 

’ὔ ~ > 7 1‘ 3 > \ em” 
γενέσθαι παῖδας Ἀσίην καὶ Ἄτυν: ἐκ δὲ Ἄτυος 
καὶ Καλλιθέας τῆς Xwpaiov “υδὸν φῦναι καὶ Tup- 
ρηνόν" καὶ τὸν μὲν Avdov αὐτοῦ καταμείναντα τὴν 
/ > \ ~ \ > > > ~ / 
πατρῴαν ἀρχὴν παραλαβεῖν Kai ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ Avdiav 
τὴν γῆν ὀνομασθῆναι: Τυρρηνὸν δὲ τῆς ἀποικίας 
ς / \ / ~ > / \ 
ἡγησάμενον πολλὴν κτήσασθαι τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας Kat 
τοῖς συναραμένοις τοῦ στόλου ταύτην θέσθαι τὴν 
» / Ἥ, ὃ / ὃ A wv 1 “A ~ 
ἐπωνυμίαν. ροδότῳ δὲ εἴρηνται τυος τοῦ 
Μάνεω παῖδες ot περὶ Τυρρηνόν, καὶ ἡ μετανάστασις 
τῶν Μῃόνων εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν οὐχ ἑκούσιος. φησὶ γὰρ 
ἐπὶ τῆς Ἄτυος ἀρχῆς ἀφορίαν καρπῶν ἐν τῇ γῇ 
Μηόνων γενέσθαι, τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους τέως μὲν 
ὑπὸ τῆς φιλοχωρίας κρατουμένους πολλὰ διαμη- 
χανήσασθαι πρὸς τὴν συμφορὰν ἀλεξητήρια, τῇ μὲν 
ἑτέρᾳ τῶν ἡμερῶν μέτρια σιτία προσφερομένους, 
τῇ δ᾽ ἑτέρᾳ διακαρτεροῦντας" χρονίζοντος δὲ τοῦ 
δεινοῦ δεινείμαντας ἅπαντα τὸν δῆμον διχῇ 5 κλή- 
3 ~ / > aA ~ \ \ 2 73 > "ὃ 

ρους ὃ ταῖς μοίραις ἐπιβαλεῖν, τὸν μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἐξόδῳ 
τῆς χώρας, τὸν δ᾽ ἐπὶ μονῇ, καὶ τῶν “Atvos παίδων 
τὸν μὲν τῇ προσνεῖμαι, τὸν δὲ τῇ. λαχούσης δὲ 
τῆς ἅμα Λυδῷ μοίρας τὴν τοῦ μεῖναι τύχην," ἐκ- 
χωρῆσαι τὴν ἑτέραν ἀπολαχοῦσαν τῶν χρημάτων 


1 Reiske: εἴρηται Ο; εἴρηται ὡς .. . ἑκούσιος γέγονεν Sylburg. 
ἐδιχῇ BmgCD, διὰ AB. 
* κλήρους Steph. : κλήρου 9. 
4 τὸν μὲν τῆ προσνεῖμαι τὸν δὲ τῆ Β : τὸν μὲν προσμεῖναι τὸν δὲ 
R. 
μὴ δ τὴν τοῦ μεῖναι (OF μένειν) τύχην Casaubon: τὴν μὲν ἀμείνω 
τύχην Ο. 


86 


BOOK I. 27, 14 


of Oceanus, was Cotys, who by Halié, the daughter 
of earth-born Tyllus, had two sons, Asies and Atys, 
from the latter of whom by Callithea, the daughter 
of Choraeus, came Lydus and Tyrrhenus. Lydus, 
they continue, remaining there, inherited his father’s 
kingdom, and from him the country was called 
Lydia; but Tyrrhenus, who was the leader of the 
colony, conquered a large portion of Italy and gave 
his pame to those who had taken part in the ex- 
pedition. Herodotus, however, says! that Tyrrhenus 
and his brother were the sons of Atys, the son of 
Manes, and that the migration of the Maeonians to 
Italy was not voluntary. For he says that in the 
reign of Atys there was a dearth in the country of 
the Maeonians and that the inhabitants, inspired 
by love of their native land, for a time contrived a 
great many methods to resist this calamity, one day 
permitting themselves but a moderate allowance of 
food and the next day fasting. But, as the mischief 
continued, they divided the people into two groups 
and cast lots to determine which should go out of 
the country and which should stay in it; of the 
sons of Atys one was assigned to the one group and 
the other to the other. And when the lot fell to that 
part of the people which was with Lydus to remain 
in the country, the other group departed after re- 
ceiving their share of the common possessions ; and 


1, 94. But the quotation is inaccurate in two im- 
portant details: Herodotus mentions only one son of Atys, 
Tyrrhenus, and says that Atys joined himself to the group 
destined to remain at home, but assigned his son to the 
other. 


87 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τὰ μέρη, ὁρμισαμένην δ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῖς ἑσπερίοις μέρεσι 
τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας, ἔνθα ἦν ᾿Ομβρικοῖς ἡ οἴκησις, αὐτοῦ 
καταμείνασαν ἱδρύσασθαι πόλεις τὰς ἔτι καὶ κατ᾽ 
αὐτὸν ἐκεῖνον οὔὖσας. 

XXVIII. Τούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ πολλοὺς καὶ ἄλλους 
συγγραφεῖς" περὶ τοῦ Τυρρηνῶν γένους χρησα- 
μένους ἐπίσταμαι, τοὺς μὲν κατὰ ταὐτά, τοὺς δὲ 
μεταθέντας τὸν οἰκισμὸν καὶ τὸν χρόνον. ἔλεξαν 
γὰρ δή τινες ᾿Ηρακλέους υἱὸν εἶναι τὸν Τυρρηνὸν 
ἐξ ᾿Ομφάλης τῆς “υδῆς γενόμενον: τοῦτον 
ἀφικόμενον εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν ἐκβαλεῖν τοὺς Π]ελασγοὺς 
ἐκ τῶν πόλεων οὐχ ἁπασῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσαι πέραν ἦσαν 
τοῦ Τεβέριος ἐν τῷ βορείῳ μέρει. ἕτεροι de Τηλέ- 
φου παῖδα τὸν Τυρρηνὸν ἀποφαίνουσιν, ἐλθεῖν δὲ 
μετὰ 5 Τροίας ἅλωσιν εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν. Ξάνθος δὲ ὁ 
Avéos t ἱστορίας παλαιᾶς εἰ καί τις ἄλλος ἔ ἔμπειρος 
ὦν, τῆς δὲ πατρίου καὶ βεβαιωτὴς ἂν οὐδενὸς ὑπο- 
δεέστερος νομισθείς, οὔτε Τυρρηνὸν ὠνόμακεν οὐ- 
δαμοῦ τῆς γραφῆς δυνάστην “υδῶν οὔτε ἀποικίαν 
Μηῃόνων εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν κατασχοῦσαν eee Τυρ- 
ρηνίας τε μνήμην ὡς Avddv ἀποκτίσεως 3 ταπει- 
νοτέρων ἄλλων μεμνημένος οὐδεμίαν πεποίηται" 
Ἄτυος δὲ παῖδας γενέσθαι λέγει Avécv Kal Τόρηβον, 
τούτους δὲ μερισαμένους τὴν πατρῴαν ἀρχὴν ἐν 
Acta καταμεῖναι ἀμφοτέρους καὶ τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ὧν 
Hp néav ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνων φησὶ τεθῆναι τὰς ὀνομασίας, 
λέγων ὧδε: “ἀπὸ Λυδοῦ μὲν γίνονται Λυδοί, ἀπὸ 


1 συγγραφεῖς Ambrosch: ἐν γραφῆ O. 
μετὰ Ο: μετὰ τὴν Jacoby. 
ὅ ἀποκτίσεως Ba(?): ἀποικήσεως R. 


88 


BOOK I. 27, 4-28, 2 


landing in the western parts of Italy where the 
Umbrians dwelt, they remained there and built the 
cities that still existed even in his time. 

XXVIII. I am aware that many other authors 
also have given this account of the Tyrrhenian 
race, some in the same terms, and others changing 
the character of the colony and the date. For some 
have said that Tyrrhenus was the son of Herakles 
by Omphalé, the Lydian, and that he, coming into 
Italy, dispossessed the Pelasgians of their cities, 
though not of all, but of those only that lay beyond 
the Tiber toward the north. Others declare that 
Tyrrhenus was the son of Telephus and that after 
the taking of Troy he came into Italy. But Xanthus 
of Lydia,! who was as well acquainted with ancient 
history as any man and who may be regarded as 
an authority second to none on the history of his 
own country, neither names Tyrrhenus in any part 
of his history as a ruler of the Lydians nor knows 
anything of the landing of a colony of Maeonians 
in Italy; nor does he make the least mention of 
Tyrrhenia as a Lydian colony, though he takes 
notice of several things of less importance. He 
says that Lydus and Torebus were the sons of Atys; 
that they, having divided the kingdom they had 
inherited from their father, both remained in Asia, 
and from them the nations over which they reigned 
received their names. His words are these: “ From 
Lydus are sprung the Lydians, and from Torebus 


1 Xanthus, an older contemporary of Herodotus, was 
the first barbarian to write the history of his country in 
Greek. The passage here cited is given as frg. 1 in Miller, 
P.H.G. i. p. 36. 


89 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Τορήβου δὲ Τόρηβοι. τούτων ἡ γλῶσσα ὀλίγον 
παραφέρει, καὶ νῦν ἔτι σιλλοῦσιν ' ἀλλήλους 5 ῥή- 
> oS σ » \ δῳ 39 
pata οὐκ ὀλίγα, ὥσπερ “Iwves καὶ Δωριεῖς. 
e / 
Ελλάνικος δὲ ὁ Λέσβιος τοὺς Τυρρηνούς φησι 
\ ΄ ‘ > \ 4 
[leXacyovs πρότερον καλουμένους, ἐπειδὴ κατῴ- 
> > / - Δ ~ 4 
κησαν ev “ItaXia, παραλαβεῖν ἣν viv ἔχουσι προση- 
͵ Μ \ τ A > , ς / Ng 
yopiav. ἔχει δὲ αὐτῷ ἐν Dopwvids ὁ λόγος ὧδε: 
“ τοῦ Πελασγοῦ τοῦ βασιλέος 3 αὐτῶν καὶ Μενίππης 
~ ~ ~ > v4 
τῆς Πηνειοῦ ἐγένετο Φράστωρ, tod δὲ ᾿Αμύντωρ, 
~ ~ > 
τοῦ δὲ Τευταμίδης, τοῦ δὲ Navas. ἐπὶ τούτου 
« ‘ 
βασιλεύοντος οἱ ΠΠ]ελασγοὶ ὑπ᾽ ᾿ Ελλήνων ἀνέστησαν, 
A > ‘ > ~ cal > ~ =i / 4 SA A 
Kai ἐπὶ Σπινῆτι ποταμῷ ev τῷ ‘loviw* κόλπῳ τὰς 
- / / / > 4, 
νῆας καταλιπόντες Κρότωνα πόλιν ev μεσογείῳ 
e ‘ > = ς / \ ~ / 
εἷλον Kai ἐντεῦθεν ὁρμώμενοι τὴν viv καλεομένην 
Τυρσηνίην ἔκτισαν. Μυρσίλος δὲ τὰ ἔμπαλιν 
ἀποφαίνων ὃ ᾿Ελλανίκῳ τοὺς Τυρρηνούς φησιν, 
> \ \ « ~ > / > ~ ’; 
ἐπειδὴ τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἐξέλιπον, ἐν τῇ πλάνῃ μετο- 
~ ~ > , - 
νομασθῆναι IleAapyovs, τῶν ὀρνέων τοῖς καλου- 
΄ -“ > > 
μένοις πελαργοῖς εἰκασθέντας, ws Kat ἀγέλας 
2 \ / \ 
ἐφοίτων els τε τὴν ᾿ξΕλλάδα καὶ τὴν βάρβαρον καὶ 
1 σιλλοῦσιν A, σίλλουσιν B: συλῶσιν Ritschl, ὁμολογοῦσιν 
Sintenis, συνάδουσιν Jacoby (in note), ἐυνοῦσιν Meineke, 
ξυνιᾶσιν Naber. 
2 ἀλλήλους O: ἀλλήλοις Sintenis, Meineke, Jacoby (in 
note). ἀλλήλων Naber. The construction required by the 
rare verb σιλλόω is uncertain, but the double accusative is 


very questionable ; probably either ἀλλήλων ῥήματα or ἀλλή- 
λους eis ῥήματα should be read. 


90 


BOOK T. 28. 2-4 


the Torebians. There is little difference in their 
language and even now each nation scoffs at many 
words used by the other,! even as do the Ionians 
and Dorians.” Hellanicus of Lesbos says that the 
Tyrrhenians, who were previously called Pelasgians, 
received their present name after they had settled 
in Italy. These are his words in the Phoronis :? 
“* Phrastor was the son of Pelasgus, their king, and 
Menippé, the daughter of Peneus; his son was 
Amyntor, Amyntor’s son was Teutamides, and the 
latter’s son was Nanas. In his reign the Pelasgians 
were driven out of their country by the Greeks, and 
after leaving their ships on the river Spines 8 in the 
Ionian Gulf, they took Croton, an inland city; and 
proceeding from there, they colonized the country 
now called Tyrrhenia.” But the account Myrsilus 
gives is the reverse of that given by Hellanicus. 
The Tyrrhenians, he says,’ after they had left their 
own country, were in the course of their wanderings 
called Pelargoi or “ Storks,” from their resemblance 
to the birds of that name, since they swarmed 
in flocks both into Greece and into the barbarian 

Τὴ other words, they simply spoke different dialects 
of a common language and each nation jested at the 
*‘ provincialisms”’ of the other. This explanation obvi- 
ates the numerous emendations that have been offered for 
the rare word σιλλοῦσιν. 

? Miller, F.H.G. i. p. 45, frg. 1. 

’The Spinetic mouth of the Po. See chap. 18, 3. 

‘Miller, F.H.G. iv. p. 457 frg. 3. 





SCobet: βασιλέως O. To Cobet are aiso due the other 
Ionic forms in whe quotation. 

*Sylburg: ἰονικῷ AB. 

δ ἀποφαινόμενος Ὁ, Jacoby. 


91 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ , ‘ ‘ - ‘ \ \ > / 
τοῖς ᾿Αθηναίοις τὸ τεῖχος TO περὶ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν, 
/ ~ 
τὸ Πελαργικὸν καλούμενον, τούτους περιβαλεῖν. 
ΧΧΙΧ. ᾿Εμοὶ μέντοι δοκοῦσιν ἅπαντες ἅμαρ- 
͵ ς D a \ \ 4. νῦν [ἢ 5 A 
τάνειν ot πεισθέντες Ev καὶ TO αὐτὸ ἔθνος εἶναι TO 
i ‘ \ \ TT λ ΄ ~ A \ > 
vppnvixov καὶ TO Π]ελασγικόν. τῆς μὲν yap ovo- 
~ ΄ \ ~ 
μασίας ἀπολαῦσαί ποτε αὐτοὺς τῆς ἀλλήλων οὐδὲν 
\ > > ι oy , » ‘ ῃ 
θαυμαστὸν ἦν, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἄλλα δή τινα ἔθνη͵ τὰ μὲν 
“ΕΟλλήνων, τὰ δὲ βαρβάρων, ταὐτὸ ' ἔπαθεν, ὥσπερ 
\ > ~ ~ 
τὸ Τρωικὸν καὶ τὸ Φρυγικὸν ἀγχοῦ οἰκοῦντα ἀλλή- 
«- Δ -“-« ,» 
λων (πολλοῖς γέ τοι γένος ἕν ἄμφω ταῦτ᾽ ἐνομίσθη, 
κλήσει διαλλάττον, οὐ φύσει) καὶ οὐχ ἥκιστα τῶν 
» Ai / > θέ \ \ > 
ἄλλοθί που συνωνυμίαις ἐπικερασθέντων Kal τὰ ἐν 
D s A \ a ~ 
᾿Ιταλίᾳ ἔθνη ἦν yap δὴ χρόνος ὅτε Kat Aativor 
καὶ ᾿Ομβρικοὶ καὶ Αὔσονες καὶ συχνοὶ ἄλλοι Τυρ- 
‘ 5 3 / 3 ~ ~ ~ 
ρηνοὶ ὑφ᾽ ᾿ Ἑλλήνων ἐλέγοντο, τῆς διὰ μακροῦ τῶν 
~ > ~ / - 
ἐθνῶν οἰκήσεως ἀσαφῆ ποιούσης τοῖς πρόσω τὴν 
> 4 / *P / ᾽ \ ‘ ~ 
ἀκρίβειαν: τήν τε Ῥώμην αὐτὴν πολλοὶ τῶν avy- 
> 
γραφέων Τυρρηνίδα πόλιν εἶναι ὑπέλαβον. ὀνομάτων 
7 > > , > \ \ ͵ , = 
μὲν οὖν ἐναλλαγήν, ἐπεὶ Kat βίων, πείθομαι τοῖς 
ἔθνεσι γενέσθαι: κοινοῦ δὲ ἄμφω μετειληφέναι γέ- 
νους οὐ πείθομαι, πολλοῖς τε ἄλλοις καὶ μάλιστα 
“ A ΕῚ ΄ / \ > / 
ταῖς φωναῖς αὐτῶν διηλλαγμέναις καὶ οὐδεμίαν 
ὁμοιότητα σωζούσαις τεκμαιρόμενος. “Ὅ καὶ 5 γὰρ 
ἱταὐτὸ Ο: ταὐτὸν Jacoby. 


276 αὐτὸ ἔπαθον after ἔθνη deleted by Garrer. 
3 καὶ Herodotus: ἢ AB. 


92 


BOOK I. 28, 4-29, 3 


lands; and they built the wall round the citadel of 
Athens which is called the Pelargic wall.} 

XXIX. But in my opinion all who take the 
Tyrrhenians and the Pelasgians to be one and the 
same nation are mistaken. It is no wonder they were 
sometimes called by one another’s names, since the 
same thing has happened to certain other nations 
also, both Greeks and barbarians,—for example, to the 
Trojans and Phrygians, who lived near each other 
(indeed, many have thought that those two nations 
were but one, differing in name only, not in fact). 
And the nations in Italy have been confused under 
a common name quite as often as any nations 
elsewhere. For there was a time when the Latins, 
the Umbrians, the Ausonians and many others were 
all called Tyrrhenians by the Greeks, the remoteness 
of the countries inhabited by these nations making 
their exact distinctions obscure to those who lived 
at a distance. And many of the historians have 
taken Rome itself for a Tyrrhenian city. I am 
persuaded, therefore, that these nations changed 
their name along with their place of abode, but 
can not believe that they both had a common origin, 
for this reason, among many others, that their 
languages are different and preserve not the least 
resemblance to one another. “ For neither the 


1 Pelargikon was the earlier form of the word, perhaps 
meaning “ Stork’s Nest’’; but its close resemblance to 
Pelasgikon gave rise in time to the belief that the latter was 
the true form. The tradition that Pelasgians once dwelt 
in Athens and built this wall on the Acropolis does not 
appear to be much older than the time of Herodotus. 
The next step was to show that even the form Pelargikon 
had reference to the Pelasgians. 


93 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ » ~ 33 « 
δὴ οὔτε Κροτωνιῆται," ᾽, ὥς φησιν ᾿Ηρόδοτος, 
cc > - ~ ~ 
οὐδαμοῖσι 5 τῶν viv σφεας περιοικεόντων εἰσὶν 
ε / 
ὁμόγλωσσοι οὔτε ΠἸλακιηνοί, σφίσι δ᾽ ὁμόγλωσσοι. 
- a. Ve \ > ~ 
δηλοῦσι δὲ ὅτι, τὸν ἠνείκαντο γλώσσης χαρακτῆρα 
/ > ~ ~ 
μεταβαίνοντες ἐς ταῦτα τὰ χωρία, τοῦτον ἔχουσιν 
> =~ 3) 
ev φυλακῇ." καίτοι θαυμάσειεν av τις, εἰ Πλακια- 
- \ ~ \ \ ¢ / > ~ ς / 
vois μὲν τοῖς περὶ τὸν ᾿ λλήσποντον οἰκοῦσιν ὁμοίαν 
/ ¢ ~ 
διάλεκτον εἶχον ot Κροτωνιᾶται, ἐπειδὴ Iledacyot 
Ss > / > ~ - \ 7 ” 
ἦσαν ἀμφότεροι ἀρχῆθεν, Τυρρηνοῖς δὲ τοῖς ἔγγιστα 
οἰκοῦσι μηδὲν ὁμοίαν. εἰ γὰρ τὸ συγγενὲς τῆς 
ς / ” ς / / / ΄- 
ὁμοφωνίας αἴτιον ὑποληπτέον, θάτερον δή που τῆς 
/ > A \ / \ > ‘ > - 
διαφωνίας: οὐ γὰρ δὴ κατά γε τὸ αὐτὸ ἐγχωρεῖ 
/ 5» ’ \ A \ A \ 4 
νομίζειν τἀμφότερα. Kal yap δὴ TO μὲν ἕτερον 
\ / 2 Se 3 Ss / \ δὴ A 4 
καὶ λόγον Tw’ ἂν ἃ εἶχε γενόμενον, TO δὴ τοὺς πρόσω 
Ἁ > / > > > / / « - 
τὰς οἰκήσεις am ἀλλήλων ποιησαμένους ὁμοεθνεῖς 
/ 7 \ >’ \ ~ / 
μηκέτι διασώζειν τὸν αὐτὸν τῆς διαλέκτου yapa- 
~ \ A ‘ \ “λ ¢ nV ‘ δὲ \ 
κτῆρα διὰ τὰς πρὸς τοὺς πέλας ὁμιλίας" TO δὲ τοὺς 
΄ ε΄ ~ > ~ 
ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς οἰκοῦντας χωρίοις μηδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν κατὰ 
τὴν φωνὴν ἀλλήλοις ὁμολογεῖν ἐκ ταὐτοῦ φύντας 
/ > / / ” 
γένους οὐδένα λόγον ἔχει. 
ὦ / \ \ ~ / ‘fi 
XXX. Τούτῳ μὲν δὴ τῷ τεκμηρίῳ χρώμενος 
~ ~ \ 
ἑτέρους εἶναι πείθομαι τῶν Τυρρηνῶν τοὺς {]ελασ- 


1Jacoby: κροτωνιάταις A, κροτωνίταις B; κρηστωνιῆται 
MSS. of Herodotus. 

2 οὐδαμοῖσι Ambrosch, οὐδαμοῖς Reiske: οὐδ᾽ ἀλλοις O. 

Sry’ av Jacoby, ἄν τινα Reiske: τινὰ O. 


94 


BOOK IT. 29, 3-30, 1 


Crotoniats,” says Herodotus,! “nor the Placians 
agree in language with any of their present neigh- 
bours, although they agree with each other; and 
it is clear that they preserve the fashion of speech 
which they brought with them into those regions.” 
However, one may well marvel that, although the 
Crotoniats had a speech similar to that of the 
Placians, who lived near the Hellespont,” since both 
were originally Pelasgians, it was not at all] similar to 
that of the Tyrrhenians, their nearest neighbours. 
For if kinship is to be regarded as the reason why 
two nations speak the same language, the contrary 
must, of course, be the reason for their speaking a 
different one, since surely it is not possible to be- 
lieve that both these conditions arise from the same 
cause. For, although it might reasonably happen, 
on the one hand, that men of the same nation who 
have settled at a distance from one another would, 
as the result of associating with their ne:ghbours, no 
longer preserve the same fashion of speech, yet it is 
not at all reasonable that men sprung from the same 
race and living in the same country should not in 
the least agree with one another in their language. 
XXX. For this reason, therefore, I am persuaded 
that the Pelasgians are a different people from the 


14.57. Since Niebuhr first championed (Rom. Gesch. i. 
note 89, p. 39) the form of the name given by Dionysius as 
against Crestoniats (and Creston) found in Herodotus, the 
belief has steadily gained ground that the MSS. of 
Herodotus are in error. The latest editor of Herodotus, 
Legrand (1932), restores Κροτωνιῆται (and Κρότωνα) in the 
text. 

2 Placia lay to the east of Cyzicus, at the foot of Mt. 
Olympus. It disappeared at an early date. 


95 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


uA ᾽ \ 57; δὲ A δῶ \ T: \ > ͵ 
γούς. οὐ μὲν δὴ οὐδὲ Avdav τοὺς Τυρρηνοὺς ἀποί- 
κους οἶμαι γενέσθαι: οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐκείνοις ὁμόγλωσσοι 
A ~ \ ~ 
εἰσιν, οὐδ᾽ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν ὡς φωνῇ μὲν οὐκέτι χρῶνται 
͵ Μ / / ~ 
παραπλησίᾳ, ἄλλα δέ Twa διασώζουσι τῆς μητρο- 
,ὔ 1 vA ΕΣ \ θ \ A 5 - \ 
πόλεως μηνύματα. οὔτε yap θεοὺς Avdois τοὺς 
> > 
αὐτοὺς νομίζουσιν οὔτε νόμοις οὔτ᾽ ἐπιτηδεύμασι 
3 / ~ 
κέχρηνται παραπλησίοις, ἀλλὰ κατά ye ταῦτα πλέον 
~ a“ ~ / 
Δυδῶν διαφέρουσιν ἢ LleAacyav. κινδυνεύουσι 
- - > rs ¢ 
yap τοῖς ἀληθέσι μᾶλλον ἐοικότα λέγειν ot? μηδα- 
3 5» > A ” > 
μόθεν ἀφιγμένον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιχώριον τὸ ἔθνος ἀποφαί- 
> \ > al / \ > \ »Μ 
νοντες, ἐπειδὴ ἀρχαῖόν τε πάνυ καὶ οὐδενὶ ἄλλῳ 
͵ὔ a ς / λ » ¢ δί nv 3 4 / 
γένει οὔτε ὁμόγλωσσον οὔτε ὁμοδίαιτον ὃν  εὑρί- 
’ > > ¢ / \ ~ 
σκεται. ὠνομάσθαι δ᾽ ὑφ᾽ ᾿Ελλήνων αὐτὸ τῇ 
προσηγορίᾳ ταύτῃ οὐδὲν κωλύει, καὶ διὰ τὰς ἐν 
΄ > > > 
ταῖς τύρσεσιν οἰκήσεις Kal ἀπ᾽ ἀνδρὸς δυνάστου. 
- > 
“Ρωμαῖοι μέντοι ἄλλαις αὐτὸ προσαγορεύουσιν 
\ RIN ~ / > e 
ὀνομασίαις: Kal yap ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας, ἐν ἢ ποτε 
ΕΝ « / « / 
ᾧκησαν, ‘Etpovpias προσαγορευομένης ‘Etpovoxous 
~ > ~ > 
καλοῦσι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους: Kal ἐπὶ τῆς ἐμπειρίας 
τῶν περὶ τὰ θεῖα σεβάσματα λειτουργιῶν, δια- 
ς “- \ / 
φέροντας εἰς αὐτὴν ἑτέρων, νῦν μὲν Tovoxovs* 
͵ » > ~ A 
ἀσαφέστερον, πρότερον δ᾽ ἀκριβοῦντες τοὔνομα 
σ σ / > / > \ / 
ὥσπερ “EAAnves Θυοσκόους ἐκάλουν αὐτοὶ μέντοι 
~ > ~ e ‘ ¢ 
σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν ἡγεμόνων twos “Pacéva? 
1 γῆς after μητροπόλεως deleted by Madvig. 
20: added by Reiske. 3 ὃν added by Cobet. 


ἀμὲ; Τούσκους Sintenis, μέντοι Τούσκους Ritschl : μέν τοι Ο. 
δ Tapaceva or Ταρσένα Lepsius. 


96 


BOOK I. 30, 1-3 


Tyrrhenians. And I do not believe, either, that the 
Tyrrbenians were a colony of the Lydians; for they 
do not use the same language as the latter, nor can it 
be alleged that, though they no longer speak a simi- 
lar tongue, they still retain some other indications 
of their mother country. For they neither worship 
the same gods as the Lydians nor make use of simi- 
lar laws or institutions, but in these very respects 
they differ more from the Lydians than from the 
Pelasgians. Indeed, those probably come nearest 
to the truth who declare that the nation migrated 
from nowhere else, but was native to the country, 
since it is found to be a very ancient nation and to 
agree with no other either in its language or in its 
manner of living. And there is no reason why the 
Greeks should not have called them by this name, 
both from their living in towers and from the name 
of one of their rulers. The Romans, however, give 
them other names: from the country they once 
inhabited, named Etruria, they call them Etruscans, 
and from their knowledge of the ceremonies relating 
to divine worship, in which they excel others, they 
now call them, rather inaccurately, Tusci,! but for- 
merly, with the same accuracy as the Greeks, they 
called them Thyoscoi.2, Their own name for them- 
selves, however, is the same as that of one of their 


1 The prevailing view to-day is that Tuscz is for Turse, 
turs being the same element that is seen in Τυρσηνός. 
Etrusci may be simply a lengthened form of Turscz, with 
u and r interchanged. 

* This statement is not borne out by information we 
have from any other source. It is merely an attempt 
to find a Greek etymology for Tusci. Θυοσκόοι were 
sacrificing priests. 


97 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τ > A 3 / / > / / 
4 τὸν αὐτὸν eéexeivw τρόπον ὀνομάζουσι. πόλεις 
Ui 
δὲ ἅστινας ᾧκισαν ' ot Τυρρηνοί, καὶ πολιτευμάτων 
οὕστινας κατεστήσαντο κόσμους, δύναμίν τε ὁπόσην 
> 
ἐκτήσαντο > καὶ ἔργα εἴ τινα μνήμης ἄξια διεπρά- 
ἕαντο, τύχαις τε ὁποίαις ἐχρήσαντο, ἐν ἑτέρῳ 
δ δηλωθήσεται λόγῳ. τὸ δ᾽ οὖν ]]ελασγικὸν φῦλον, 
\ 
ὅσον μὴ διεφθάρη τε Kal κατὰ τὰς ἀποικίας 
ὃ ίσθη, διέ δὲ ὀλί ἱπὸ πολλοῦ J 
ιεσπάσθη, διέμεινε δὲ ὀλίγον ἀπὸ πολλοῦ, μετὰ 
~ > / / > ΑΓ, e / 
τῶν APopryvwv πολιτευόμενον ἐν τούτοις ὑπελείφθη 
τοῖς χωρίοις, ὅπου σὺν χρόνῳ τὴν Ῥώμην οἱ ἔκ- 
γονοι αὐτῶν σὺν τοῖς ἄλλοις 3 ἐπολίσαντο. καὶ 
τὰ μὲν ὑπὲρ τοῦ ΠΠ]ελασγικοῦ γένους μυθολογούμενα 
τοιάδε ἐστί. 
ΧΧΧΙ. Μετὰ δὲ οὐ πολὺν χρόνον στόλος ἄλλος 
«ς ~ ~ 
Ελληνικὸς ets ταῦτα τὰ χωρία τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας κατά- 
γεται, ἑξηκοστῷ μάλιστα ἔτει πρότερον τῶν Τρωι- 
~ e > ΕἾ. “ / > / 
κῶν, ws αὐτοὶ “Pawpato. λέγουσιν, ἐκ ]]αλλαντίου 
πόλεως ᾿Αρκαδικῆς ἀναστάς. ἡγεῖτο δὲ τῆς ἀποι- 
, ” « = / \ ΄ Ν' 
κίας Εὔανδρος ᾿Ερμοῦ λεγόμενος καὶ νύμφης τινὸς 
"A / > / Δ ¢ \ “ENA Θ / Ss 
ρκάσιν ἐπιχωρίας, ἣν οἱ μὲν nves Θέμιν εἶναι 
λέγουσι καὶ θεοφόρητον ἀποφαίνουσιν, οἱ δὲ τὰς 
- > / ~ 
“Ρωμαϊκὰς συγγράψαντες ἀρχαιολογίας τῇ πατρίῳ 4 
” « 
γλώσσῃ Kappévrnv® ὀνομάζουσιν" εἴη δ᾽ ἂν ᾿ Ελλάδι 
φωνῇ Θεσπιῳδὸς τῇ νύμφῃ τοὔνομα" τὰς μὲν γὰρ 
~ ~ \ ~ 
ὠδὰς καλοῦσι “Ρωμαῖοι κάρμινα," τὴν δὲ γυναῖκα 
ταύτην ὁμολογοῦσι δαιμονίῳ πνεύματι κατάσχετον 
1 Portus: ᾧκησαν Ο. 
2 ἐκτήσαντο Garrer: οἱ σύμπαντες O, Jacoby ; οἱ σύμπαντες 
ἐκέκτηντο Reiske. 


ϑάλλοις O: ‘AABavois Kiessling. 
4 Meineke: πατρώω AB. 


9% 


BOOK I. 30, 4-31, 1 


leaders, Rasenna. In another book! J shall show 
what cities the Tyrrhenians founded, what forms 
of government they established, how great power 
they acquired, what memorable achievements they 
performed, and what fortunes attended them. As 
for the Pelasgian nation, however, those who were 
not destroyed or dispersed among the various 
colonies (for a small number remained out of a 
great many) were left behind as fellow citizens of 
the Aborigines in these parts, where in the course 
of time their posterity, together with others, built 
the city of Rome. Such are the legends told about 
the Pelasgian race. 

XXXI. Soon after, another Greek expedition landed 
in this part of Italy, having migrated from Pallan- 
tium, a town of Arcadia, about the sixtieth year 
before the Trojan war,” as the Romans themselves say. 
This colony had for its leader Evander, who is said 
to have been the son of Hermes and a local nymph 
of the Arcadians. The Greeks call her Themis and 
say that she was inspired, but the writers of the 
early history of Rome call her, in the native lan- 
guage, Carmenta. The nymph’s name would be in 
Greek Thespiédos or “ prophetic singer”; for the 
Romans call songs carmina, and they agree that 
this woman, possessed by divine inspiration, fore- 


1 Nothing of the sort is found in the extant portions of 
the Antiquities. It is hardly probable that Dionysius in- 
tended to devote a separate work to the Etruscans. 

2 ca. 1243 B.c. 





®Urlichs: καρμένταν A, καρμετῖνον B. 
®Steph.: καρμίανα B, θερμίανα A. 


99 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ > 
γενομένην τὰ μέλλοντα συμβαίνειν τῷ πλήθει δι 
φδῆς προλέγειν. 6 δὲ στόλος οὗτος οὐκ ἀπὸ 
- “a / b] / > \ , 
τοῦ κοινοῦ τῆς γνώμης ἐπέμφθη, ἀλλὰ στασιάσαν- 
τος τοῦ δήμου τὸ ἐλαττωθὲν μέρος ἑκούσιον ᾿ 
ε ~ > / \ / \ / ~ 
ὑπεξῆλθεν. ἐτύγχανε δὲ τότε τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν 
> ~ 
Afopryivwy παρειληφὼς Φαῦνος, "Apeos ws φασιν 
ἀπόγονος, ἀνὴρ μετὰ τοῦ Spactypiov Kal συνετός, 
καὶ αὐτὸν ὡς τῶν ἐπιχωρίων τινὰ “Ῥωμαῖοι δαι- 
μόνων θυσίαις καὶ φὠδαῖς γεραίρουσιν. οὗτος ὁ 
ἀνὴρ δεξάμενος κατὰ πολλὴν φιλότητα τοὺς Ap- 
κάδας ὀλίγους ὄντας, δίδωσιν αὐτοῖς τῆς αὑτοῦ 
/ e / > / ε δὲ "A (ὃ «ς 
χώρας ὁπόσην ἐβούλοντο. οἱ δὲ Αρκάδες, ὡς 
ς Θέ ᾿] - ᾿] θ / ” ς ~ 
ἡ Θέμις αὐτοῖς ἐπιθειάζουσα ἔφραζεν, αἱροῦνται 
/ 3...» > / ~ / “ > ~ 
λόφον ὀλίγον ἀπέχοντα τοῦ Τεβέριος, ὅς ἐστι νῦν 
ἐν μέσῳ μάλιστα τῆς “Ῥωμαίων πόλεως, καὶ κατα- 
ὑπεαδίθοιμα πρὸς αὐτῷ κώμην βραχεῖαν, δυσὶ 
ναυτικοῖς * ᾿πληρώμασιν. ἐν οἷς ἀπανέστησαν τῆς 
“Ελλάδος ἀποχρῶσαν, ἣν ἔμελλε τὸ πεπρωμένον 
σὺν χρόνῳ θήσειν ὅσην οὔθ᾽ ᾿Ελλάδα πόλιν οὔτε 
βάρβαρον κατά τε οἰκήσεως μέγεθος καὶ κατὰ 
δυναστείας ἀξίωσιν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην ἅπασαν εὐτυχίαν, 
΄ > 
χρόνον τε ὁπόσον ἂν ὁ θνητὸς αἰὼν ἀντέχῃ πόλεων 
~ ΝΜ, 
μάλιστα πασῶν μνημονευθησομένην. ὄνομα δὲ 
~ > a“ 
τῷ πολίσματι τούτῳ τίθενται LladAdvtiov ἐπὶ τῆς 
> e > , ~ / ~ / / 
ἐν ᾿Αἀρκαδίᾳ σφῶν μητροπόλεως" viv μέντοι []αλά- 
~ / 
τιον ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων λέγεται συγχέαντος τοῦ χρόνου 
- 3 > 
τὴν ἀκρίβειαν καὶ παρέχει πολλοῖς ἀτόπων ἐτυμο- 
λογιῶν ἀφορμάς" 


1Ambrosch: ἑκούσιον μέρος O. 


100 


BOOK I. 31, 1-4 


told to the people in song the things that would 
come to pass. This expedition was not sent out by 
the common consent of the nation, but, a sedition 
having arisen among the people, the faction which 
was defeated left the country of their own accord. 
It chanced that the kingdom of the Aborigines 
had been inherited at that time by Faunus, a de- 
scendant of Mars, it is said, a man of prudence as 
well as energy, whom the Romans in their sacrifices 
and songs honour as one of the gods of their country. 
This man received the Arcadians, who were but few 
in number, with great friendship and gave them as 
much of his own land as they desired. And the 
Arcadians, as Themis by inspiration kept advising 
them, chose a hill, not far from the Tiber, which is 
now near the middle of the city of Rome, and by 
this hill built a small village sufficient for the com- 
plement of the two ships in which they had come 
from Greece. Yet this village was ordained by 
fate to excel in the course of time all other cities, 
whether Greek or barbarian, not only in its size, 
but also in the majesty of its empire and in every 
other form of prosperity, and to be celebrated 
above them all as long as mortality shall endure. 
They named the town Pallantium after their mother- 
city in Arcadia; now, however, the Romans call 
it Palatium, time having obscured the correct form, 
and this name has given occasion to many to suggest 
absurd etymologies. 





35 δυσὶ ναυτικοῖς Steph.: δυσὶν (δυσὶ B) ἀλτικοῖς AB, δυσὶν 
ἀλητικοῖς Ca, Madvig; δυσὶν ἁλιευτικοῖς Kiessling, 


101 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


XXXII. ds δέ τινες ἱστοροῦσιν, ὧν ἐστι καὶ 
΄ « ΄ > ‘ . 
Πολύβιος ὁ Μεγαλοπολίτης, ἐπί τινος μειρακίου 
/ ~ ¢ 
Πάλλαντος αὐτόθι τελευτήσαντος - τοῦτον δὲ “Hpa- 
κλέους εἶναι παῖδα καὶ “αουϊνίας τῆς Εὐάνδρου 
θυγατρός: χώσαντα δ᾽ αὐτῷ τὸν μητροπάτορα 
/ > \ ~ , / > A ~ / 
τάφον ἐπὶ τῷ λόφῳ [Παλλάντιον ἐπὶ τοῦ μειρακίου 
τὸν τόπον ὀνομάσαι. ἐγὼ μέντοι οὔτε τάφον 
> / > « / / »” \ Μ 
ἐθεασάμην ἐν “Ρώμῃ [1]άλλαντος οὔτε χοὰς ἔμαθον 
ἐπιτελουμένας οὔτε ἄλλο τῶν τοιουτοτρόπων οὐδὲν 
ἠδυνήθην ἰδεῖν,Ξ3 καίτοι γε οὐκ ἀμνήστου τῆς οἰκίας 
ταύτης ἀφειμένης οὐδ᾽ ἀμοίρου τιμῶν αἷς τὸ δαι- 
μόνιον γένος ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων γεραίρεται. καὶ γὰρ 
77 / »” e \ «ς / > 
Εὐάνδρῳ θυσίας ἔμαθον ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων ἐπιτελου- 
μένας ὁσέτη δημοσίᾳ καὶ Καρμέντῃ, καθάπερ τοῖς 
- >] 
λοιποῖς ἥρωσι καὶ δαίμοσι, καὶ βωμοὺς ἐθεασάμην 
ἱδρυμένους, Καρμέντῃ μὲν ὑπὸ τῷ καλουμένῳ 
/ \ - / / te 4 
Καπιτωλίῳ παρὰ ταῖς Καρμεντίσι πύλαις, Edavdpw 
δὲ πρὸς ἑτέρῳ τῶν λόφων Αὐεντίνῳ λεγομένῳ τῆς 
Τριδύμου πύλης οὐ πρόσω: []άλλαντι δὲ οὐδὲν 
> / rd « > s > 4 «ε \ 
οἶδα τούτων γινόμενον. ot δ᾽ οὖν ApKddes ὑπὸ 
~ / / / Μ ’ὔ A 
τῷ λόφῳ συνοικισθέντες τά τε ἄλλα διεκόσμουν τὸ 
~ «ς 
κτίσμα ὃ τοῖς οἴκοθεν νομίμοις χρώμενοι καὶ ἱερὰ 
δ / ~ \ ~ A / TT ‘ ~ Θέ- 
ἱδρύονται, πρῶτον μὲν τῷ “υκαίῳ Ilavi τῆς Θέ 
> 5 7 \ ~ > / 4 
μιδος ἐξηγουμένης (Apdo. yap θεῶν ἀρχαιότατός 
͵ > > 
τε Kal τιμιώτατος ὁ Ildv) χωρίον ἐξευρόντες ἐπι- 
~ ~ « ~ 
τήδειον, ὃ καλοῦσι “Ρωμαῖοι Πουπερκάλιον, ἡμεῖς 
δ᾽ ἂν εἴποιμεν Μύκαιον. νῦν μὲν οὖν συμπεπολι- 
1 Λαουϊνίας Cary (see p. 196, n. 2), “αύνας Ambrosch : 


duvas O. 2 ἰδεῖν B, μαθεῖν R. 
3 διεκόσμουν τὸ κτίσμα Kiessung: διεκοσμοῦντο κτίσματα O. 


102 


BOOK 1. 32, 1-4 


XXXII. But some writers, among them Polybius 
of Megalopolis, relate that the town was named 
after Pallas, a lad who died there; they say that 
he was the son of Hercules and Lavinia, the daughter 
of Evander, and that his maternal grandfather 
raised a tomb to him on the hill and called the place 
Pallantium, after the lad. But I have never seen 
any tomb of Pallas at Rome nor have 1 heard of 
any drink-offerings being made in his honour nor 
been able to discover anything else of that nature, 
although this family has not been left unremembered 
or without those honours with which divine beings 
are worshipped by men. For I have learned 
that public sacrifices are performed yearly by the 
Romans to Evander and to Carmenta in the same 
manner as to the other heroes and minor deities; 
and I have seen two altars that were erected, one 
to Carmenta under the Capitoline hill near the Porta 
Carmentalis, and the other to Evander by another 
hill, called the Aventine, not far from the Porta 
Trigemina; but I know of nothing of this kind 
that is done in honour of Pallas. As for the 
Areadians, when they had joined in a single settle- 
ment at the foot of the hill, they proceeded to adorn 
their town with all the buildings to which they 
had been accustomed at home and to erect temples. 
And first they built a temple to the Lycaean Pan 
by the direction of Themis (for to the Arcadians 
Pan is the most ancient and the most honoured of 
al] the gods), when they had found a suitable site 
for the purpose. This place the Romans call the 
Lupercal, but we should call it Lykaion or “ Ly- 
caeum.” Now, it is true, since the district about 


103 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


σμένων τῷ τεμένει τῶν πέριξ χωρίων δυσείκαστος 
γέγονεν ἡ παλαιὰ τοῦ τόπου φύσις, ἦν δὲ τὸ ἀρχαῖον 
ὡς λέγεται σπήλαιον ὑπὸ τῷ λόφῳ μέγα, δρυμῷ 
λασίῳ κατηρεφές, καὶ κρηνῖδες ὑπὸ ταῖς πέτραις 
ἐμβύθιοι, 7 τε προσεχὴς τῷ κρημνῷ 1 νάπη πυκνοῖς 
καὶ μεγάλοις δένδρεσιν ἐπίσκιος. ἔνθα βωμὸν 
ἱδρυσάμενοι τῷ θεῷ τὴν πάτριον θυσίαν ἐπετέλεσαν, 
ἣν μέχρι τοῦ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς χρόνου “Ῥωμαῖοι θύουσιν 
ἐν μηνὶ Φεβρουαρίῳ μετὰ τὰς χειμερίους τροπάς, 
οὐδὲν τῶν τότε γενομένων μετακινοῦντες" ὁ δὲ 
τρόπος τῆς θυσίας ἐν τοῖς ἔπειτα λεχθήσεται. ἐπὶ 
δὲ τῇ κορυφῇ τοῦ λόφου τὸ τῆς Νίκης τέμενος 
ἐξελόντες θυσίας καὶ ταύτῃ κατεστήσαντο διε- 
τησίους, ἃς καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ “Ῥωμαῖοι ἔθυον. 


1 τῷ κρημνῷ Kiessling: τῶν κρημνῶν Ο. 





1 ΤῊΘ Lupercal was situated at the foot of the Palatine, 
probably at the south-west corner ; it is further described 
in chap. 79, 8, and the Lupercalia in 80, 1. For a dis- 
cussion of the various theories respecting the origin of the 
Lupercalia the reader is referred to Sir James Frazer’s 
note on Ovid, Fasti ii. 267 (vol. ii. pp. 327 ff. = pp. 389 ff. 
in his L.C.L. edition). When once the adjective Avxaios 
(really “οἱ Mt. Lycaeus,”’ in Arcadia) was taken as the 
equivalent of Lupercalis and Lycaean Pan identified with 
the god worshipped at the Lupercalia, “ύκαιον and Λύκαια 
would naturally be equated with Lupercal and Lupercalia, 
in spite of the fact that these words as used in Greece 
meant the shrine and games of Zeus Lycaeus. 

2 With the present passage should be compared three 
others in the Antiquities where Dionysius, for the benefit 
of his Greek public, indicates the season of the year in 
which a Roman date fell. Just below, in chap. 38, 3, he 
speaks of the Ides of May as being a little after the vernal 
equinox; in chap. 88, 3, he places the Parilia (April 21) in 


104 


BOOK I. 32, 4-5 


the sacred precinct has been united with the city, 
it has become difficult to make out by conjecture 
the ancient nature of the place. Nevertheless, at 
first, we are told, there was a large cave under the 
hill overarched by a dense wood; deep springs 
issued from beneath the rocks, and the glen ad- 
joining the cliffs was shaded by thick and lofty 
trees.'! In this place they raised an altar to the god 
and performed their traditional sacrifice, which the 
Romans have continued to offer up to this day in 
the month of February, after the winter solstice,* 
without altering anything in the rites then performed. 
The manner of this sacrifice will be related later. 
Upon the summit of the hill they set apart the pre- 
cinct of Victory and instituted sacrifices to her 
also, lasting throughout the year, which the Romans 
performed even in my time. 


the beginning of spring; and in ix. 25, 1, he says the new 
consuls assumed office near the summer solstice in the 
month of Sextilis (probably on the Calends of August). 
At first sight it might be thought that he was following an 
early Roman calendar that was a month or a little more in 
advance of the seasons. But the only calendar with which 
he can have had any personal acquaintance at Rome was 
the calendar as reformed by Julius Caesar, in effect since 
the year 46; and in three of the four passages he is de- 
scribing a festival as it was still celebrated in his own day. 
We are almost forced, then, to one of two conclusions, 
either that he was content to define the season very 
roughly, or else that he was using the term “ solstice ”’ 
loosely for the middle of winter or summer and “ equinox ”’ 
for a period midway between—a usage that it would be 
hard to parallel—and even delaying “‘ spring ’’ correspond- 
ingly. Yet when it came to a Greek date as far back as 
the fall of Troy he could write with the greatest precision 
(chap. 63, 1). 


105 


ὡς: 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


XXXII. Ταύτην δὲ ᾿Αρκάδες μυθολογοῦσι Πάλ- 
λαντος εἶναι θυγατέρα τοῦ Λυκάονος τιμὰς δὲ παρ᾽ 
ἀνθρώπων ἃς ἔχει νῦν ᾿Αθηνᾶς βουλήσει λαβεῖν, 
γενομένην τῆς θεοῦ σύντροφον. δοθῆναι γὰρ εὐθὺς 
ἀπὸ γονῆς τὴν Αθηνᾶν [Π]άλλαντι ὑπὸ Διὸς καὶ 
παρ᾽ ἐκείνῳ τέως εἰς wpav! ἀφίκετο τραφῆναι. 
ἱδρύσαντο δὲ καὶ Δήμητρος ἱερὸν καὶ τὰς θυσίας 
αὐτῇ διὰ γυναικῶν τε καὶ νηφαλίους ἔθυσαν, ὡς 
Ἕλλησι νόμος, ὧν οὐδὲν 6 Kal? ἡμᾶς ἤλλαξε 
χρόνος. ἀπέδειξαν δὲ καὶ Ποσειδῶνι τέμενος 
‘Inmiw καὶ τὴν ἑορτὴν ᾿Ϊπποκράτεια μὲν ὑπ᾽ "Ap- 
κάδων, Κωνσουάλια δὲ ὑπὸ Ρωμαίων λεγόμενα 
κατεστήσαντο, ἐν ἧ παρὰ Ρωμαίοις ἐξ ἔθους 
ἐλινύουσιν ἔργων ἵπποι καὶ ὀὁρεῖς καὶ στέφονται 
τὰς κεφαλὰς ἄνθεσι. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα τεμένη 
καὶ βωμοὺς καὶ βρέτη θεῶν καθωσίωσαν, ἁγισμούς 
τε καὶ θυσίας κατεστήσαντο πατρίους, at μέχρι 
τῶν KAT ἐμὲ χρόνων τὸν αὐτὸν ἐγίνοντο τρόπον. 
οὐ θαυμάσαιμι δ᾽ ἂν εἰ καὶ παρεῖνταί τινες δια- 
φυγοῦσαι τὴν τῶν ἐπιγινομένων μνήμην ὑπὸ 3 τοῦ 
πάνυ ἀρχαίου: ἀλλ᾽ ἀποχρῶσί γε αἱ νῦν ἔτι γινό- 
μεναι τεκμήρια εἶναι τῶν ApKadiK@v ποτε νομίμων " 
λεχθήσεται δὲ περὶ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ πλεῖον ἐν ἕτέροις. 


Ἰ ὥραν A: οὐρανοὺς Β. δ ὑπὸ Cobet: ἀπὸ O. 
8 αἱ Ambrosch, αἱ καὶ Reiske: καὶ Ο. 





1 Poseidon Hippios of the Greeks. 

“See note on u. 31, 2. 

’Dionysius perhaps is thinking particularly of the 
passage in Book VII (72, 14-18), where he points out the 


106 


BOOK |. 33, 1-3 


XXXII. The Arcadians have a legend that this 
goddess was the daughter of Pallas, the son of 
Lycaon, and that she received those honours from 
mankind which she now enjoys at the desire of 
Athena, with whom she had been reared. For 
they say that Athena, as soon as she was born, was 
handed over to Pallas by Zeus and that she was 
reared by him till she grew up. They built also 
a temple to Ceres, to whom by the ministry of 
women they offered sacrifices without wine, accord- 
ing to the custom of the Greeks, none of which rites 
our time has changed. Moreover, they assigned a 
precinct to the Equestrian Neptune ! and instituted 
the festival called by the Arcadians Hippocrateia 
and by the Romans Consualia,? during which it 
is customary among the latter for the horses and 
mules to rest from work and to have their heads 
crowned with flowers. They also consecrated many 
other precincts, altars and images of the gods 
and instituted purifications and sacrifices according 
to the customs of their own country, which con- 
tinued to be performed down to my day in the same 
manner. Yet I should not be surprised if some 
of the ceremonies by reason of their great antiquity 
have been forgotten by their posterity and neglected ; 
however, those that are still practised are sufficient 
proofs that they are derived from the customs 
formerly in use among the Arcadians, of which I 
shall speak more at length elsewhere.? The Arcadians 


close agreement even in details between a Roman and 
a Greek sacrifice. See also i. 80, 1 (the Lupercalia) and 
1. 34, 4; °38, -2-3.;- 40; 3-5. 


107 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


4 λέγονται δὲ καὶ γραμμάτων ᾿Ελληνικῶν χρῆσιν 


bo 


εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν πρῶτοι διακομίσαι νεωστὶ φανεῖσαν 
᾿Αρκάδες καὶ μουσικὴν τὴν δι᾿ ὀργάνων, ἃ δὴ λύραι 
τε καὶ τρίγωνα καὶ αὐλοὶ ' καλοῦνται, τῶν προτέρων 
ὅτι μὴ σύριγξι ποιμενικαῖς οὐδενὶ ἄλλῳ μουσικῆς 
τεχνήματι χρωμένων, νόμους τε θέσθαι καὶ τὴν 
δίαιταν ἐκ τοῦ θηριώδους ἐπὶ πλεῖστον εἰς ἡμερό- 
τητα μεταγαγεῖν τέχνας τε καὶ ἐπιτηδεύματα καὶ 
ἄλλα πολλά τινα ὠφελήματα εἰς τὸ κοινὸν κατα- 
θεῖναι, καὶ διὰ ταῦτα πολλῆς ἐπιμελείας τυγχάνειν 
πρὸς τῶν ὑποδεξαμένων. τοῦτο δεύτερον ἔθνος 
“Ελληνικὸν μετὰ Πελασγοὺς ἀφικόμενον εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν 
κοινὴν ἔσχε μετὰ τῶν 5 ᾿Αβοριγίνων οἴκησιν ἐν τῷ 
κρατίστῳ τῆς “Ρώμης ἱδρυσάμενον χωρίῳ. 
XXXIV. ᾽Ολίψοις δ᾽ ὕστερον ἔτεσι μετὰ τοὺς 
Δρκάδας ἄλλος εἰς ᾿Ϊταλίαν ἀφικνεῖται στόλος 
“Ελληνικὸς ἄγοντος ᾿Ηρακλέους, ὃς “IBnpiav καὶ 
τὰ μέχρι δυσμῶν ἡλίου πάντα χειρωσάμενος ἧκεν.3 
ἐξ on τινες parca παραιτησάμενοι τῆς στρα- 
τείας ἀφεθῆναι, περὶ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία ὑπέμειναν 
καὶ πολίζονται λόφον ἐπιτήδειον εὑρόντες, τρι- 
σταδίῳ δὲ μάλιστα μήκει τοῦ [Παλλαντίου διειργό- 
μενον, ὃς νῦν μὲν Καπιτωλῖνος ὀνομάζεται, ὑπὸ 
δὲ τῶν τότε ἀνθρώπων Σατόρνιος ἐλέγετο, ὥσπερ 
ἂν εἴποι τις ᾿Ελλάδι φωνῇ Kpovos. τῶν δὲ 
ὑπολειφθέντων οἱ μὲν πλείους ἦσαν “Πελοποννήσιοι, 


' αὐλοὶ Camerarius: λυδοὶ Ο. 
Σμετὰ τῶν ΒΡ (2), ϑύθρηῃ. : μετὰ τὴν ABa; pera τὴν τῶν (sic) 
Jacoby, who probabl} y meant to print pera τῶν ᾿Α4. τὴν οἴκησιν. 
*#xev Kiessling: ἦν O. 


108 


BOOK I. 33, 4-34, 2 


are said also to have been the first to introduce into 
Italy the use of Greek letters, which had lately 
appeared among them, and also music performed 
on such instruments as lyres, trigons! and flutes ; 
for their predecessors had used no musical invention 
except shepherd’s pipes. They are said also to have 
established laws, to have transformed men’s mode 
of life from the prevailing bestiality to a state of 
civilization, and likewise to have introduced arts 
and professions and many other things conducive 
to the public good, and for these reasons to have been 
treated with great consideration by those who had 
received them. This was the next Greek nation 
after the Pelasgians to come into Italy and to take 
up a common residence with the Aborigines, estab- 
lishing itself in the best part of Rome. 

XXXIV. A few years after the Arcadians an- 
other Greek expedition came into Italy under the 
command of Hercules, who had just returned from 
the conquest of Spain and of all the region that ex- 
tends to the setting of the sun. It was some of his 
followers who, begging Hercules to dismiss them from 
the expedition, remained in this region and _ built 
a town on a suitable hill, which they found at a 
distance of about three stades from Pallantium. 
This is now called the Capitoline hill, but by the 
men of that time the Saturnian hill, or, in Greek, 
the hill of Cronus. The greater part of those who 
stayed behind were Peloponnesians— people of 


1 The trigon was a triangular harp. 


4 στρατείας Naber: πραγματείας O, Jacoby. 


109 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Devedral te καὶ ᾿Ἐπειοὶ ot! ἐξ "Ηλιδος, ois οὐκέτι 
πόθος ἦν τῆς οἴκαδε ὁδοῦ διαπεπορθημένης αὐτοῖς 
~ > ~ 
τῆς πατρίδος ev τῷ πρὸς ᾿Ηρακλέα πολέμῳ, ἐμέ- 
μικτο δέ τι καὶ Τρωικὸν αὐτοῖς τῶν ἐπὶ “αομέ- 
δοντος αἰχμαλώτων ἐξ ᾿Ϊλίου γενομένων ὅτε τῆς 
sr Ἥ λῇ > / ὃ - ὃ / ‘ ~ 
πόλεως ᾿ Πρακλῆς ἐκράτησε. δοκεῖ δέ μοι Kal τοῦ 
ἄλλου στρατοῦ πᾶν, εἴ τι καματηρὸν 7, τῇ πλάνῃ 
ἀχθόμενον ἦν, ἄφεσιν τῆς στρατείας αἰτησάμενον 
8 ἐν τῷ χωρίῳ τῷδε ὑπομεῖναι. τὸ δὲ ὄνομα. τῷ 
λόφῳ τινὲς μὲν ὥσπερ ἔφην ἀρχαῖον οἴονται εἶναι, 
\ > ’ \ \ > \ » - ~ 
καὶ du’ αὐτὸ τοὺς ᾿Επειοὺς οὐχ ἥκιστα φιλοχωρῆσαι 
τῷ λόφῳ μνήμῃ τοῦ ev “Hdd. Κρονίου λόφου, 
ὅς ἐστιν ἐν τῇ [Πιἰσάτιδι γῇ ποταμοῦ πλησίον 
"Ar ~ ‘\ a ¢ ᾿ ~ K / ΄ 
φειοῦ, καὶ αὐτὸν ἱερὸν τοῦ Κρόνου νομίζοντες 
ἪΛ.λ ΄ θ / \ »” A / 
εἴοι θυσίαις Kat ἄλλαις τιμαῖς συνιόντες ye- 
4 / > « ΄ / Εὐ 2 δὲ 
ραίρουσιν ἐν ὡρισμένοις χρόνοις. Βὐξενος 5 δὲ 
\ 3 > - \ ΝΜ \ ~ > ~ 
ποιητὴς 3 ἀρχαῖος καὶ ἄλλοι τινὲς τῶν ᾿Ϊταλικῶν 
μυθογράφων ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν οἴονται {Πισατῶν διὰ τὴν 
ὁμοιότητα τοῦ παρὰ σφίσι Κρονίου τεθῆναι τῷ 
τόπῳ τοὔνομα, καὶ τὸν βωμὸν τῷ Κρόνῳ τοὺς 
᾿Επειοὺς ἱδρύσασθαι μεθ᾽ ᾿Ηρακλέους, ὃς ἔτι καὶ 
΄- ~ ε ~ 
νῦν διαμένει παρὰ τῇ ῥίζῃ τοῦ λόφου κατὰ τὴν 
ἄνοδον τὴν ἀπὸ τῆς ἀγορᾶς φέρουσαν εἰς τὸ Καπι- 
τώλιον, τήν τε θυσίαν, ἣν καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ “Ρωμαῖοι 
» / ‘ ep ἐν ‘ / > / 
ἔθυον φυλάττοντες τὸν ᾿Ελληνικὸν νόμον, ἐκείνους 
> > 
5 εἶναι τοὺς καταστησαμένους. ws δ᾽ ἐγὼ συμ- 
Ἰοΐ O: om. Reudler, Jacoby. 
2”Evnos Sylburg. 8 Kiessling : ὁ ποιητὴς O. 





‘No poet of this name is known, and Sylburg was perhaps 
right in proposing to read Ennius. Strictly speaking, 


110 


BOOK I. 34, 2-5 


Pheneus and Epeans of Elis, who no longer had any 
desire to return home, since their country had been 
laid waste in the war against Hercules. There was 
also a small Trojan element mingled with these, con- 
sisting of prisoners taken from [lium in the reign 
of Laomedon, at the time when Hercules conquered 
the city. And I am of the opinion that all] the rest 
of the army, also, who were either wearied by their 
labours or irked by their wanderings, obtained 
their dismissal from the expedition and remained 
there. As for the name of the hill, some think it 
was an ancient name, as I have said, and that conse- 
quently the Epeans were especially pleased with the 
hill through memory of the hill of Cronus in Elis. 
This is in the territory of Pisa, near the river Alpheus, 
and the Eleans, regarding it as sacred to Cronus, 
assemble together at stated times to honour it 
with sacrifices and other marks of reverence. But 
Euxenus,! an ancient poet, and some others of the 
Italian mythographers think that the name was given 
to the place by the men from Pisa themselves, ‘from 
its likeness to their hill of Cronus, that the Epeans 
together with Hercules erected the altar to Saturn 
which remains to this day at the foot of the hill 
near the ascent that leads from the Forum to the 
Capitol, and that it was they who instituted the 
sacrifice which the Romans still performed even in 
my time, observing the Greek ritual. But from the 


Ennius was an Italian rather than a Roman, though it 
may be questioned whether Dionysius would have made 
this distinction. In the extant fragments of Ennius there 
is no reference to Hercules’ visit, to say nothing of the 
Epeans. 


111] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


7 ¢ ~ 
βαλλόμενος εὑρίσκω, καὶ πρὶν ᾿Ηρακλέα ἐλθεῖν εἰς 
᾿Ιταλίαν ἱερὸς ἦν 6 τόπος τοῦ Κρόνου καλούμενος 
e 4 ~ > / ΄ κ ε » A > » 
ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων Σατόρνιος, καὶ ἡ ἄλλη δὲ ἀκτὴ 
σύμπασα ἡ νῦν ᾿ἰταλία καλουμένη τῷ θεῷ τούτῳ 
ἀνέκειτο, Σατορνία πρὸς τῶν ἐνοικούντων ὀνομαζο- 
μένη, ὡς ἔστιν εὑρεῖν ἔν τε Σιβυλλείοις τισὶ λογίοις ἷ 
καὶ ἄλλοις χρηστηρίοις ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν δεδομένοις 

~ ~ > ¢ 
εἰρημένον, ἱερά τε πολλαχῇ τῆς χώρας ἐστὶν ἱδρυ- 
~ ~ “ σ ε 
μένα τῷ θεῷ καὶ πόλεις τινὲ οὕτως ὥσπερ ἢ 
σύμπασα τότε ἀκτὴ ὀνομαζόμεναι χῶροί τε πολλοὶ 
7 ς 
τοῦ δαίμονος ἐπώνυμοι καὶ μάλιστα οἱ σκόπελοι 
καὶ τὰ μετέωρα᾽ 
ΧΧΧΥ. ᾿Ϊταλία δὲ ἀνὰ χρόνον ὠνομάσθη ἐπ᾽ 
> \ / a” > ~ ~ ͵ὔ 
ἀνδρὸς δυνάστου ὄνομα ᾿ἰταλοῦ. τοῦτον δέ φησιν 
> / ε bd / > Ad \ \ 
Avrioyos ὁ Συρακούσιος ἀγαθὸν καὶ σοφὸν yeyevn- 
μένον καὶ τῶν πλησιοχώρων τοὺς μὲν λόγοις ava- 
/ “ > 
πείθοντα, τοὺς δὲ βίᾳ προσαγόμενον, ἅπασαν ὑφ 
~ ~ σ > Ss ~ 
ἑαυτῷ ποιήσασθαι τὴν γῆν ὅση ἐντὸς ἦν τῶν κόλ- 
~ D \ ~ 
πων τοῦ te Ναπητίνου" καὶ τοῦ Σκυλλητίνου "8 
~ > ~ ~ 
ἣν δὴ πρώτην κληθῆναι ᾿ἰταλίαν ἐπὶ τοῦ ᾿Ϊταλοῦ. 
\ > ἘΠι19 
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταύτης καρτερὸς ἐγένετο καὶ ἀνθρώπους 
πολλοὺς εἶχεν ὑπηκόους αὐτίκα" τῶν ἐχομένων 
> ‘ A \ 5A e / θ 5 AA / . 
ἐπορέγεσθαι Kat πόλεις ὑπάγεσθαι ὃ πολλάς : εἶναι 
«ς 
δ᾽ αὐτὸν Οἴνωτρον τὸ γένος. ᾿Ελλάνικος δὲ ὁ 
1Reiske: λόγοις Ο. 


ὃ Ναπητίνου O: Λαμητικοῦ Aristotle, Pol. vii. 9, 2. 
8 Σκυλλητικοῦ Hudson. 


4 αὐτίκα R: αὐτῶ καὶ B; αὑτῷ, αὐτίκα Jacoby. 
®Usener: συνάγεσθαι O, Jacoby. 


112 


BOOK 1. 34, 5-35, 2 


best conjectures I have been able to make, I find 
that even before the arrival of Hercules in Italy 
this place was sacred to Saturn and was called by 
the people of the country the Saturnian hill, and all 
the rest of the peninsula which is now called Italy 
was consecrated to this god, being called Saturnia ὦ 
by the inhabitants, as may be found stated in some 
Sibylline prophecies and other oracles delivered by 
the gods. And in many parts of the country there 
are temples dedicated to this god ; certain cities bear 
the same name by which the whole peninsula was 
known at that time, and many places are called by 
the name of the god, particularly headlands and 
eminences, 

XXXYV. But in the course of time the land came 
to be called Italy, after a ruler named Italus. This 
man, according to Antiochus of Syracuse,” was both 
a wise and good prince, and persuading some of his 
neighbours by arguments and subduing the rest 
by force, he made himself master of all the land 
which lies between the Napetine and Scylacian 
bays,° which was the first land, he says, to be called 
Italy, after Italus. And when he had possessed 
himself of this district and had many subjects, he 
immediately coveted the neighbouring peoples and 
brought many cities under his rule. He says 
further that Italus was an Oenotrian by birth. 


1 Compare Virgil’s use of Saturnia tellus (Georg. i. 173, 
Aen. viii. 329) and Saturnia arva (Aen. i. 569) for Italy. 

2 For Antiochus see p. 39, ἢ. 2. This quotation is frg. 4 
in Miller, F.H.G. i. pp. 181 f. 

3 In other words, nearly all the ‘“‘ toe’’ of Italy south of 
the latitude of the Lacinian promontory. 


113 
VOL. I. F 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


, , « ~ 
Δέσβιός φησιν Ηρακλέα τὰς Γ᾽ ρυόνου βοῦς ἀπε- 
λ / ᾽ "A » ,ὔ >) ~ 4 

avvovta εἰς Ἄργος, ἐπειδή τις αὐτῷ δάμαλις 
5 / ~ 5 / ᾿] » ,ὔ Ε 7 ΕΣ 
ἀποσκιρτήσας τῆς ἀγέλης ἐν ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ ἐόντι ἤδη 
~ \ ἊΝ 
φεύγων διῆρε τὴν ἀκτὴν καὶ τὸν μεταξὺ διανη- 
ἕ 7ὔ ’ὔ ~ bar / 5 px r , 5 , 
Edpevos πόρον τῆς at7ns εἰς Σικελίαν ἀφίκετο, 
>] ~ oa 
ἐρόμενον ἀεὶ τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους καθ᾽ ovs ἑκάστοτε 
γίνοιτο διώκων τὸν δάμαλιν, εἴ πή τις αὐτὸν 
ε A » ~ ~ > 7ὔ ς ᾽, % 
ἑωρακὼς εἴη, τῶν τῇδε ἀνθρώπων “Ελλάδος μὲν 
λ 7 SAC / ~ δὲ , ~ 
γλώττης ὀλίγα συνιέντων, TH δὲ πατρίῳ φωνῇ 
κατὰ τὰς μηνύσεις τοῦ ζῴου καλούντων τὸν δά- 
a ~ ~ 
μαλιν οὐίτουλον, ὥσπερ Kat νῦν λέγεται, ἐπὶ τοῦ 
A ~ 
ζῴου τὴν χώραν ὀνομάσαι πᾶσαν ὅσην ὁ δάμαλις 
διῆλθεν Οὐιτουλίαν. μεταπεσεῖν δὲ ἀνὰ χρόνον 
τὴν ὀνομασίαν εἰς τὸ νῦν σχῆμα οὐδὲν θαυμαστόν, 
τὶ \ \ ~ € ~ \ \ / 
ἐπεὶ καὶ τῶν ᾿Ελληνικῶν πολλὰ τὸ παραπλήσιον 

/ > / \ ” e >) , ,ὔ 
πέπονθεν ὀνομάτων. πλὴν εἴτε ὡς ᾿Αντίοχός φησιν 
ἐπ᾽ ἀνδρὸς ἡγεμόνος, ὅπερ ἴσως καὶ πιθανώτερόν 
9 wf)? ¢ e 4 " » \ ~ ,ὔ + 
ἐστιν, εἴθ᾽ ὡς ᾿Ελλάνικος οἴεται ἐπὶ τοῦ ταύρου τὴν 
ὀνομασίαν ταύτην ἔσχεν, ἐκεῖνό γε ἐξ ἀμφοῖν δῆλον, 
σ \ \ Ἥ, a € ͵ὔ “Ἃ ~ , 
ὅτι κατὰ τὴν ᾿ Πρακλέους ἡλικίαν ἢ μικρῷ πρόσθεν 

΄“ » / A \ \ A ’ὔ “Ἐλλ A 
οὕτως ὠνομάσθη. τὰ δὲ πρὸ τούτων Nves μὲν 
‘E. / ‘ Ab /, > | \ > tr « δ᾽ φ 

σπερίαν καὶ Αὐσονίαν αὐτὴν ἐκάλουν, οἱ ἐπι- 
χώριοι ΣΖατορνίαν, ὡς εἴρηταί μοι πρότερον. 
ε ‘ 

XXXVI. Ἔστι δέ τις καὶ ἕτερος λόγος ὑπὸ 

~ ~ A 
τῶν ἐπιχωρίων μυθολογούμενος, ὡς πρὸ τῆς Διὸς 

- ~ ~ \ 
ἀρχῆς ὁ Kpdovos ἐν τῇ γῇ ταύτῃ δυναστεύσειε, καὶ 

Φ 7 » 0 / 7 oa \ c ,ὔ 
6 λεγόμενος ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνου βίος ἅπασι δαψιλὴς ὁπόσοις 





1For Hellanicus see p. 71, n. 1. The quotation that 
follows is ἴσα. 97 in Muller, F.H.G. 1. p. 58. 


114 


BOOK I. 35, 2-36, 1 


But Hellanicus of Lesbos! says that when Hercules 
was driving Geryon’s cattle to Argos and was come 
to Italy, a calf escaped from the herd and in its 
flight wandered the whole length of the coast and 
then, swimming across the intervening strait of the 
sea, came into Sicily. Hercules, following the calf, 
inquired of the inhabitants wherever ke came if 
anyone had seen it anywhere, and when the people 
of the island, who understood but little Greek and 
used their own speech when indicating the animal, 
called it vitulus (the name by which it is still known), 
he, in memory of the calf, called all the country it 
had wandered over Vitulia.2 And it is no wonder 
that the name has been changed in the course of 
time to its present form, since many Greek names, 
too. have met with a similar fate. But whether, as 
Antiochus says, the country took this name from 
a ruler, which perhaps is more probable, or, as 
Hellanicus believes, from the bull, yet this at least 
is evident from both their accounts, that in Her- 
cules’ time, or a little earlier, it received this name. 
Before that it had been called Hesperia and Ausonia 
by the Greeks and Saturnia by the natives, as I have 
already stated. 

XXXVI. There is another legend related by the 
inhabitants, to the effect that before the reign of 
Jupiter Saturn was lord in this land and that the 
celebrated manner of life? in his reign, abounding 


*Hesychius cites the Greek word iradds (originally 
Ειταλός) for “Ὧ bull,” and Timaeus, Varro and Festus 
state that Italia came from this root. 

3In Greek ὁ ἐπὶ Κρόνου Bios was proverbial for the 
Golden Age; compare the Latin Saturnia regna. 


115 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


e ~ 
ὧραι φύουσιν ov παρ᾽ ἄλλοις μᾶλλον ἢ παρὰ σφίσι 
γένοιτο. καὶ εἴ tis! ἀφελῶν τὸ μυθῶδες τοῦ 
/ / > \ > / > / > e 
λόγου χώρας ἀρετὴν ἐξετάζειν ἐθελήσειεν, ἐξ ἧς 
γένος τὸ ἀνθρώπων πλείστας εὐφροσύνας ἐκαρπώ- 
σατο γενόμενον εὐθύς, εἴτ᾽ ἐκ γῆς ὡς ὁ παλαιὸς 
4 "A ” > Μ > vn id , 
ἔχει λόγος, εἴτ᾽ ἄλλως πως, οὐκ ἂν εὕροι ταύτης 
τινὰ ἐπιτηδειοτέραν. ὡς γὰρ μία γῆ πρὸς ἑτέραν 
κρίνεσθαι τοσαύτην τὸ μέγεθος, οὐ μόνον τῆς 
Εὐρώπης ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς ἄλλης ἁπάσης κρατίστη 
κατ᾽ ἐμὴν δόξαν ἐστὶν ᾿Ϊταλίαᾳ. καίτοι με οὐ 
λέληθεν ὅτι πολλοῖς οὐ πιστὰ δόξω λέγειν, ἐνθυμου- 
/ Ay / \ A / \ B ~ \ 
μένοις Αἴγυπτόν te καὶ Λιβύην καὶ Βαβυλῶνα καὶ 
~ > 
εἰ δή τινες ἄλλοι χῶροί εἰσιν εὐδαίμονες" ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ 
τὸν ἐκ γῆς πλοῦτον οὐκ ἐν μιᾷ τίθεμαι καρπῶν 
> / 50. > / / ~ > / > = , 
ἰδέᾳ οὐδ᾽ εἰσέρχεταί με ζῆλος οἰκήσεως, ἐν 7) μόνον 
> τ y+ / ~ > »Μ ᾽ \ ” 4 
εἰσὶν ἄρουραι πίονες, τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων οὐδὲν ἢ βραχύ 
τι χρησίμων,;Σ ἀλλ᾽ ἥτις ἂν εἴη πολυαρκεστάτη τε 
καὶ τῶν ἐπεισάκτων ἀγαθῶν ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ ἐλάχι- 
> 
στον δεομένη, ταύτην κρατίστην εἶναι λογίζομαι. 
τοῦτο δὲ τὸ παμφόρον καὶ πολυωφελὲς παρ᾽ ἡν- 
~ Μ ~ > “4 ” / 
τινοῦν ἄλλην γῆν ᾿Ιταλίαν ἔχειν πείθομαι. 
XXXVI. Οὐ γὰρ ἀρούρας μὲν ἀγαθὰς ἔχει καὶ 
> > ? 2 
πολλάς, ἀδενδρος δ᾽ ἐστὶν ὡς σιτοφόρος" οὐδ᾽ αὖ 
\ \ «ς \ A ΄ ,ὔ > 
φυτὰ μὲν ἱκανὴ παντοῖα θρέψασθαι, σπείρεσθαι ὃ 
e ~ > / 0.» A A ~ 
ws Sevdpitis ὀλιγόκαρπος" οὐδ᾽ ἄμφω μὲν ταῦτα 
/ / / > > if 
παρέχειν δαψιλής, προβατεύεσθαι δ᾽ ἀνεπιτήδειος " 
οὐδ᾽ ἄν τις αὐτὴν φαίη πολύκαρπον μὲν εἶναι καὶ 


lel τις B: εἴ τις ἄλλος R; εἴ τις ἄλλως Sylburg, Jacoby. 
*Bucheler: χρήσιμον Ο. 


116 


BOOK I. 36, 1-37, 1 


in the produce of every season, was enjoyed by 
none more than by them. And, indeed, if anyone, 
setting aside the fabulous part of this account, will 
examine the merit of any country from which man- 
kind received the greatest enjoyments immediately 
after their birth, whether they sprang from the 
earth, according to the ancient tradition, or came 
into being in some other manner, he will find none 
more beneficent to them than this. For, to com- 
pare one country with another of the same extent, 
Italy is, in my opinion, the best country, not only 
of Europe, but even of all the rest of the world. And 
yet I am not unaware that I shall not be believed 
by many when they reflect on Egypt, Libya, 
Babylonia and any other fertile countries there 
may be. But I, for my part, do not limit the 
wealth derived from the soil to one sort of produce, 
nor do I feel any eagerness to live where there are 
only rich arable lands and little or nothing else 
that is useful; but I account that country the best 
which is the most self-sufficient and generally stands 
least in need of imported commodities. And I am 
persuaded that Italy enjoys this universal fertility 
and diversity of advantages beyond any other land. 

XXXVITI. For Italy does not, while possessing a 
great deal of good arable land, lack trees, as does 
a grain-bearing country; nor, on the other hand, 
while suitable for growing all manner of trees, 
does it, when sown to grain, produce scanty crops, 
as does a timbered country ; nor yet, while yielding 
both grain and trees in abundance, is it unsuitable 
for the grazing of cattle; nor can anyone say that, 
while it bears rich produce of crops and timber 


117 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


πολύδενδρον ᾿ καὶ πολύβοτον, ἐνδιαίτημα δ᾽ ἀνθρώ- 
ποις ὑπάρχειν ἄχαρι: ἀλλ᾽ ἔστι πάσης ὡς εἰπεῖν 
¢ ~ \ ᾿] / ” / \ 
ἡδονῆς τε καὶ ὠφελείας ἔκπλεως. ποίας μὲν 
A / / \ ~ > \ A 
yap λείπεται σιτοφόρου μὴ ποταμοῖς, ἀλλὰ τοῖς 
οὐρανίοις ὕδασιν ἀρδομένης τὰ καλούμενα Kap- 
πανῶν πεδία, ἐν οἷς ἐγὼ καὶ τρικάρπους ἐθεασάμην 
ἀρούρας θερινὸν ἐπὶ χειμερινῷ καὶ μετοπωρινὸν ἐπὶ 
θερινῷ σπόρον ἐκτρεφούσας 2 ; ποίας δ᾽ ἐλαιοφόρου 
\ / \ / \ / κ 
τὰ Μεσσαπίων καὶ Δαυνίων καὶ Σαβίνων καὶ 
πολλῶν ἄλλων γεώργια ; ποίας δ᾽ οἰνοφύτου Τυρ- 
ρηνία καὶ ᾿Αλβανὴ" καὶ τὰ Φαλερίνων χωρία 
= ε ͵, \ as , , 
θαυμαστῶς ws φιλάμπελα καὶ δι᾽ ἐλαχίστου πόνου 
πλείστους ἅμα καὶ κρατίστους καρποὺς ἐξενεγκεῖν 
~ > ~ 
εὔπορα; χωρὶς δὲ τῆς ἐνεργοῦ πολλὴν μὲν ἄν 
εἰ > ~ 
τις εὕροι τὴν εἰς ποίμνας ἀνειμένην αὐτῆς, πολλὴν 
δὲ τὴν αἰγινόμον, ἔτι δὲ πλείω καὶ θαυμασιωτέραν 
Μ ὁ , \ , ε Cole ᾿ 
τὴν ἱπποφορβόν τε καὶ βουκολίδα- ἡ γὰρ ἕλειος καὶ 
Α Ss ~ 
λειμωνία βοτάνη δαψιλὴς οὖσα τῶν τε ὀργάδων ἡ 
δροσερὰ καὶ κατάρρυτος ἄπειρος ὅση θέρει τε καὶ 
~ “4 \ 
χειμῶνι“ νέμεται καὶ παρέχει διὰ παντὸς εὐθενούσας 
\ « 
τὰς ἀγέλας. πάντων δ᾽ εἰσὶν οἱ δρυμοὶ θαυ- 
\ 
μασιώτατοι περί τε τὰ κρημνώδη χωρία καὶ Tas 
7, ΄ > Φ 
νάπας καὶ τοὺς ἀγεωργήτους λόφους, ἐξ ὧν ὕλης 
πολλῆς μὲν εὐποροῦσι καὶ καλῆς ναυπηγησίμου," 
~ A ~ ᾿] \ + > , ΕῚ ‘ 
πολλῆς δὲ τῆς εἰς τὰς ἄλλας ἐργασίας εὐθέτου- 
1 καὶ πολύδενδρον added by Biicheler. 
2 ἐκτρεφούσας O: ἐκφερούσας Meineke, Jacoby. 
3 ΒΥ ΡαΓρ : ἀλβανοὶ Ο. 47a added by Ambrosch. 
δ ὅση Sylburg: 7 ABa, 7 Bb. 
6 re καὶ χειμῶνι Meutzner: om. O, Jacoby. 


7 5Ans added here by Kriiger, after καλῆς by Casaubon, 
Jacoby. 


118 


BOOK I. 37, 1-4 


and herds, it is nevertheless disagreeable for men to 
live in. Nay, on the contrary, it abounds in prac- 
tically everything that affords either pleasure or 
profit. To what grain-bearing country, indeed, 
watered, not with rivers, but with rains from heaven, 
do the plains of Campania yield, in which I have 
seen fields that produce even three crops in a year, 
summer’s harvest following upon that of winter 
and autumn’s upon that of summer? To what 
olive orchards are those of the Messapians, the 
Daunians, the Sabines and many others inferior ? 
To what vineyards those of Tyrrhenia and the Alban 
and the Falernian districts, where the soil is wonder- 
fully kind to vines and with the least labour produces 
the finest grapes in the greatest abundance ? And 
besides the land that is cultivated one will find much 
that is left untilled as pasturage for sheep and goats, 
and still more extensive and more wonderful is 
the land suitable for grazing horses and cattle; for 
not only the marsh and meadow grass, which is 
very plentiful, but the dewy and well-watered grass 
of the glades, infinite in its abundance, furnish 
grazing for them in summer as well as in winter and 
keep them always in good condition. But most 
wonderful of all are the forests growing upon the 
rocky heights, in the glens and on the uncultivated 
hills, from which the inhabitants are abundantly 
supplied with fine timber suitable for the building 
of ships as well as for all other purposes. Nor are 





ὃ γᾳαυπηγησίμου R: εἰς ναυπήγησιν B. 
119 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ / > A A / ’ > » 
καὶ τούτων οὐδὲν οὔτε δυσπόριστόν ἐστιν οὔτε 
- 3 / / > 
πρόσω τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης χρείας κείμενον, ἀλλ᾽ εὐ- 
cs A ~ 
κατέργαστα Kai pddia παρεῖναι πάντα διὰ πλῆθος 
~ ~ / \ 
τῶν ποταμῶν, ot διαρρέουσιν ἅπασαν τὴν ἀκτὴν 
~ / \ A > ~ 
Kal ποιοῦσι τάς τε κομιδὰς καὶ Tas ἀμείψεις τῶν 
΄σ A 4 ~ 
ἐκ γῆς φυομένων λυσιτελεῖς. ἔχει δὲ ἡ γῆ καὶ 
~ / > A 
νάματα θερμῶν ὑδάτων ἐν πολλοῖς εὑρημένα 
\ a Ld \ 
χωρίοις, λουτρὰ παρασχεῖν ἥδιστα καὶ νόσους 
ἰάσασθαι χρονίους ἄριστα, καὶ μέταλλα παντοδαπὰ 
\ / Μ > / \ / 7 
καὶ θηρίων ἄγρας ἀφθόνους καὶ θαλάττης φύσιν 
/ \ \ 
πολύγονον ἄλλα τε μυρία, τὰ μὲν εὔχρηστα, τὰ δὲ 
> > 
θαυμάσια, πάντων δὲ κάλλιστον, ἀέρα κεκραμένον 
- σ / e σ΄ 
ταῖς ὥραις συμμέτρως, οἷον ἥκιστα πημαΐίνειν 
ΡΜ ~ x” / > ~ 
κρυμῶν ὑπερβολαῖς 71 θάλπεσιν ἐξαισίοις καρπῶν 
\ / / 
τε γένεσιν καὶ 5 ζῴων φύσιν. 
\ \ ἜΣ \ 
XXXVILI. Οὐδὲν δὴ θαυμαστὸν ἦν τοὺς πα- 
A = / \ 
λαιοὺς ἱερὰν ὑπολαβεῖν τοῦ Κρόνου τὴν χώραν tav- 
την, τὸν μὲν δαίμονα τοῦτον οἰομένους εἶναι πάσης 
/ ~ \ \ > / "Μ 
εὐδαιμονίας δοτῆρα καὶ πληρωτὴν ἀνθρώποις, εἴτε 
/ 3 > \ ὃ A λ - ¢ “EX > ~ 
Kpodvov® αὐτὸν δεῖ καλεῖν, ὡς nves ἀξιοῦσιν, 
" Σά 4 « *P - ~ δὲ λ 
εἴτε Σάτορνον,, ὡς “Ρωμαῖοι, πᾶσαν δὲ περιειλη- 
~ / ε 
φότα τὴν τοῦ κόσμου φύσιν, ὁποτέρως ἄν τις 
\ / ¢ ~ ” 
ὀνομάσῃ, τὴν δὲ χώραν ταύτην ὁρῶντας ἔκπλεω 
\ / - \ > 
πάσης εὐπορίας καὶ χάριτος, ἧς τὸ θνητὸν ἐφίεται 
~~ \ / \ ~ 
γένος, ἀξιοῦντας δὲ καὶ θείῳ καὶ θνητῷ γένει τὸ 
- / ¢ 
πρόσφορον εἶναι" πάντων χωρίων ἁρμοδιώτατον, 
» A \ / Tl 46 A ~ δὲ \ A λό 
ὄρη μὲν καὶ νάπας []ανί," λειμῶνας δὲ καὶ τεθηλότα 
174 Ambrosch: καὶ O. 2 καὶ Reiske: ἢ O. 
8 Κρόνον Sylburg: χρόνον O. 


4 Σάτορνον Sylburg (after Lapus), Ζάτουρνον Jacoby, 
Οὐρανὸν Usener: xpovov AB. ὃ ἀνεῖναι Kiessling. 


120 


BOOK I. 37, 4-38, 1 


any of these materials hard to come at or at a distance 
from human need, but they are easy to handle and 
readily available, owing to the multitude of rivers 
that flow through the whole peninsula and make 
the transportation and exchange of everything the 
land produces inexpensive. Springs also of hot water 
have been discovered in many places, affording 
most pleasant baths and sovereign cures for chronic 
ailments. There are also mines of all sorts, plenty 
of wild beasts for hunting, and a great variety of 
sea fish, besides innumerable other things, some 
useful and others of a nature to excite wonder. 
But the finest thing of all is the climate, admirably 
tempered by the seasons, so that less than elsewhere 
is harm done by excessive cold or inordinate heat 
either to the growing fruits and grains or to the 
bodies of animals. 

XXXVIII. It is no wonder, therefore, that the 
ancients looked upon this country as sacred to Saturn, 
since they esteemed this god to be the giver and 
accomplisher of all happiness to mankind,—whether 
he ought to be called Cronus, as the Greeks deem 
fitting, or Saturn, as do the Romans,—and regarded 
him as embracing the whole universe, by which- 
ever name he is called, and since they saw this 
country abounding in universal plenty and every 
charm mankind craves, and judged those places to 
be most agreeable both to divine and to human 
beings that are suited to them—for example, the 
mountains and woods to Pan, the meadows and 





ὃ νεῖμαι added after IJavi by Reiske. 
121 


τῷ 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ / 5 \ \ \ ’ , , 
χωρία νύμφαις, ἀκτὰς δὲ Kal νήσους πελαγίοις δαί- 
- ee e e / ~ \ / 
μοσι, τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων, ὡς ἑκάστῳ τι θεῷ καὶ δαίμονι 
οἰκεῖον. λέγουσι δὲ καὶ τὰς θυσίας ἐπιτελεῖν 
~ / \ / σ ᾽ ,ὔ 
τῷ Κρόνῳ τοὺς παλαιούς, ὥσπερ ἐν Καρχηδόνι 
/ ε / , \ 5 - 3 / 
τέως ἡ πόλις διέμεινε Kat παρὰ Κελτοῖς εἰς τόδε 
χρόνου γίνεται καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις τισὶ τῶν ἑσπερίων 
> ~ > / e ΄ \ ~ A ’ 
ἐθνῶν, ἀνδροφόνους, ᾿Ηρακλέα δὲ παῦσαι τὸν νόμον 
~ / / / ᾿ 4 / 
τῆς θυσίας βουληθέντα τόν τε βωμὸν ἱδρύσασθαι 
τὸν ἐπὶ τῷ Latopviw καὶ κατάρξασθαι θυμάτων 
ε ~ > \ ~ \ « ΄ Ε 1 σ \ \ 
ἁγνῶν ἐπὶ καθαρῷ πυρὶ ay Copévwr,! wa δὲ μηδὲν 
~ > , > / e / > / 
εἴη Tots ἀνθρώποις ἐνθύμιον,Σ ὡς πατρίων ἠλογηκόσι 
θυσιῶν, διδάξαι τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους ἀπομειλιττομένους 
τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ μῆνιν ἀντὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ovs 
συμποδίζοντες καὶ τῶν χειρῶν ἀκρατεῖς ποιοῦντες 
> / > ‘ ~ / Lae! yw 
ἐρρίπτουν εἰς τὸ τοῦ Τεβέριος ῥεῖθρον, εἴδωλα 
~ > / 
ποιοῦντας avopeikeAa κεκοσμημένα τὸν αὐτὸν ἐκεί- 
A σ \ \ 
νοις τρόπον ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὸν ποταμόν, wa δὴ τὸ 
~ ἘΝ > 7 ε 
τῆς ὀττείας ὅ τι δή ποτε ἦν ἐν ταῖς ἁπάντων 
ψυχαῖς παραμένον ἐξαιρεθῇ τῶν εἰκόνων τοῦ 
~ 10 3 »” / ~ δὲ \ 
παλαιοῦ πάθους 3 ἔτι σωζομένων. τοῦτο δὲ Kal 
͵ὔ > ~ Μ ὃ “λ ΝΣ - ὃ ~ 4 
μέχρις ἐμοῦ ἔτι διετέλουν “Ῥωμαῖοι δρῶντες 
~ >? ~ > / > 
ὁσέτη μικρὸν ὕστερον τῆς ὃ ἐαρινῆς ἰσημερίας ἐν 
- a / 
μηνὶ Maiw ταῖς καλουμέναις εἰδοῖς, διχομήνιδα 
> \ e / > 4 
βουλόμενοι ταύτην εἶναι τὴν ἡμέραν, ev ἧ προθύ- 
«ς , 
σαντες ἱερὰ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς νόμους οἱ καλούμενοι 
« ‘ A > 
ποντίφικες, ἱερέων ot διαφανέστατοι, καὶ σὺν αὖ- 


1 ἁγιζομένων Ambrosch (from Eusebius), σφαζομένων 
Reiske: ἀζομένων AB. 

2 ἐνθύμιον A: δέος ἢ ἐνθύμιον B, δέους ἐνθύμιον Eusebius. 

ὃ πάθους Β : ἔθους A, 4 δρῶντες A: om. B, 


122 


BOOK I. 38, 1-3 


verdant places to the nymphs, the shores and islands 
to the sea-gods, and all the other places to the god 
or genius to whom each is appropriate. It is 
said also that the ancients sacrificed human victims 
to Saturn, as was done at Carthage while that city 
stood and as is still done to this day among the 
Gauls! and certain other western nations, and that 
Hercules, desiring to abolish the custom of this 
sacrifice, erected the altar upon the Saturnian hill 
and performed the initial rites of sacrifice with un- 
blemished victims burning on a pure fire. And lest 
the people should feel any scruple at having neglected 
their traditional sacrifices, he taught them to appease 
the anger of the god by making effigies resembling 
the men they had been wont to bind hand and foot 
and throw into the stream of the Tiber, and dressing 
these in the same manner, to throw them into the 
river instead of the men, his purpose being that any 
superstitious dread remaining in the minds of all 
might be removed, since the semblance of the ancient 
rite would still be preserved. This the Romans 
continued to do every year even down to my 
day a little after the vernal equinox, in the month 
of May,? on what they call the Ides (the day they 
mean to be the middle of the month); on this 
day, after offering the preliminary sacrifices ac- 
cording to the laws, the pontifices, as the most 
important of the priests are called, and with 

1 Dionysius regularly uses the word Celts for Gauls; 


but it seems preferable to follow the English usage in the 
translation. 2 See p. 105, n. 2. 


5 ὁσέτη (ὅσα ἔτη) Ambrosch: ὅσοντι B, om, A, Jacoby. 
δ τῆς Ambrosch: om, Ὁ, Jacoby. 
123 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


A c \ > ΄ ~ / / 
τοῖς at τὸ ἀθάνατον πῦρ διαφυλάττουσαι παρθένοι 
στρατηγοί τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πολιτῶν ods παρεῖναι 
ταῖς ἱερουργίαις θέμις εἴδωλα μορφαῖς ἀνθρώπων 
εἰκασμένα, τριάκοντα τὸν ἀριθμόν, ἀπὸ τῆς ἱερᾶς 

/ ’ὔ > \ tc a ~ , 
γεφύρας βάλλουσιν εἰς τὸ ῥεῦμα τοῦ Τεβέριος, 
"A / > A ~ > Ἁ A \ \ 

pyetous αὐτὰ καλοῦντες. ἀλλὰ yap περὶ μὲν 
τῶν θυσιῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἱερουργιῶν, ἃς ἡ 
ῬῬΡ / A r A / \ “EX \ 

ὠμαΐίων πόλις συντελεῖ κατά τε TOV ηνικὸν 
καὶ τὸν ἐπιχώριον τρόπον, ἐν ἑτέρῳ λόγῳ δηλώ- 
σομεν, ἀπαιτεῖν δὲ ὁ παρὼν καιρὸς ἔοικε καὶ περὶ 

~ « 7 > / >? > / ΦΥ͂ / 
τῆς ᾿Ηρακλέους ἀφίξεως eis ᾿Ιταλίαν μετ᾽ ἐπιστά- 

/ A ‘ Μ) / Μ Μ 

σεως πλείονος διελθεῖν καὶ εἴ τι λόγου ἀξιον ἔδρασεν 
αὐτόθι μὴ παραλιπεῖν. 

XXXIX. Ἔστι δὲ τῶν ὑπὲρ τοῦ δαίμονος τοῦδε 
λεγομένων τὰ μὲν μυθικώτερα, τὰ δ᾽ ἀληθέστερα. 
ὁ μὲν οὖν μυθικὸς περὶ τῆς παρουσίας αὐτοῦ λόγος 
ὧδ᾽ ἔχει ὡς δὴ κελευσθεὶς ὑπ᾽ Εὐρυσθέως ᾿ Ηρακλῆς 
σὺν τοῖς ἄλλοις ἄθλοις καὶ τὰς Γηρυόνου βοῦς ἐξ 
2 / ’ ” > / / ‘ y 
Ἐρυθείας eis “Apyos ἀπελάσαι, τελέσας τὸν ἄθλον 
καὶ τὴν οἴκαδε πορείαν ποιούμενος ἄλλῃ τε πολλαχῇ 

τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας ἀφίκετο καὶ τῆς ““βοριγίνων γῆς εἰς 
τὸ προσεχὲς τῷ ]ΠΠαλλαντίῳ χωρίον. εὑρὼν δὲ 

\ 
πόαν ἐν αὐτῷ βουκολίδα πολλὴν καὶ καλήν, τὰς 
μὲν βοῦς ἀνῆκεν εἰς νομήν, αὐτὸς δὲ βαρυνόμενος 
ὑπὸ κόπου κατακλιθεὶς ἔδωκεν αὑτὸν ὕπνῳ. ἐν δὲ 


1younv L. Dindorf: ἐκνομὴν Ο. 





1 According to Varro the number of these effigies, made 
of bulrushes, was twenty-seven, equal to the number of 
the chapels, also called Argez, situated in various parts of 
the city. The number thirty given by Dionysius would 


124 


BOOK IT. 38, 3-39, 2 


them the virgins who guard the perpetual fire, 
the praetors, and such of the other citizens as may 
lawfully be present at the rites, throw from the 
sacred bridge into the stream of the Tiber thirty 
effigies made in the likeness of men, which they call 
Argei.! But concerning the sacrifices and the other 
rites which the Roman people perform according to 
the manner both of the Greeks and of their own 
country I shall speak in another book.” At present, 
it seems requisite to give a more particular account 
of the arrival of Hercules in Italy and to omit 
nothing worthy of notice that he did there. 
XXXIX. Of? the stories told concerning this god 
some are largely legend and some are nearer the truth. 
The legendary account of his arrival is as follows: 
Hercules, being commanded by Eurystheus, among 
other labours, to drive Geryon’s cattle from Ery- 
theia* to Argos, performed the task, and having 
passed through many parts of Italy on his way 
home, came also to the neighbourhood of Pallantium 
in the country of the Aborigines; and there, finding 
much excellent grass for his cattle, he let them 
graze, and being overcome with weariness, lay down 
and gave himself over to sleep. Thereupon a robber 


mean one for each curia; but this does not seem so prob- 
able. The sacred bridge was the pons sublicius. For 
a full discussion of the Argei see Sir James Frazer’s note 
on Ovid, Fasti v. 621 (vol. iv. pp. 74 ff., condensed in his 
L.C.L. edition, pp. 425 ff.). 2In vii. 72, 14-18. 

3 For chaps. 39-40 cf. Livy i. 7, 4-14. 

4Erytheia (“‘Red’’ Island) was perhaps originally the 
fabulous land of the sunset glow. Later it was usually 
placed somewhere near the Pillars of Hercules. 


125 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τούτῳ λῃστής τις ἐπιχώριος ὄνομα Kaxos περι- 
τυγχάνει ταῖς βουσὶν ἀφυλάκτοις νεμομέναις καὶ 
αὐτῶν ἔρωτα ἴσχει. ὡς δὲ τὸν ᾿Ηρακλέα κοιμώ- 
μενον αὐτοῦ κατέμαθεν, ἁπάσας μὲν οὐκ ἂν ᾧετο 
δύνασθαι λαθεῖν ἀπελάσας, καὶ ἅμα οὐδὲ ῥάδιον 
ov! τὸ πρᾶγμα κατεμάνθανεν. ὀλίγας δέ τινας ἐξ 
αὐτῶν εἰς τὸ ἄντρον, ἐν ᾧ πλησίον ὄντι ἐτύγχανε 
τὴν δίαιταν ποιούμενος, ἀποκρύπτεται ἔμπαλιν τῆς 
κατὰ φύσιν τοῖς ζῴοις πορείας ἐπισπώμενος ἑκά- 
στὴν Kat οὐράν. τοῦτο δὲ αὐτῷ τῶν ἐλέγχων 
ἀφανισμὸν ἐδύνατο παρασχεῖν ἐναντίας φανησο- 
μένης 5 τοῖς ἴχνεσι τῆς ὁδοῦ. ἀναστὰς δὲ μετ᾽ 
ὀλίγον ὁ “Ηρακλῆς καὶ τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἐπιλεξάμενος 
τῶν βοῶν, ὡς ἔμαθέ τινας ὃ ἐκλειπούσας, τέως μὲν 
ἠπόρει ποῦ κεχωρήκασι καὶ ὡς πεπλανημένας ἀπὸ 
τῆς νομῆς ἐμάστευεν ἀνὰ τὸν χῶρον ὡς δ᾽ οὐχ 
εὕρισκεν ἐπὶ τὸ σπήλαιον ἀφικνεῖται τοῖς μὲν 
ἴχνεσι διαρτώμενος, οὐδὲν δὲ ἧττον οἰόμενος δεῖν ὃ 
διερευνήσασθαι τὸν χῶρον. τοῦ δὲ Κάκου πρὸ τῆς 
θύρας ἑστῶτος καὶ οὔτ᾽ ἰδεῖν τὰς βοῦς φάσκοντος 
ἐρομένῳ οὔτ᾽ ἐρευνᾶσθαι ἐπιτρέποντος αἰτουμένῳ 
τούς τε πλησίον ὡς δεινὰ πάσχοι ὑπὸ τοῦ ξένου 
ἐπιβοῶντος, ἀμηχανῶν ὃ ᾿“Ηρακλῆς 6 τι χρήσεται 
τῷ πράγματι εἰς νοῦν βάλλεται προσελάσαι τῷ 
σπηλαίῳ τὰς ἄλλας βοῦς. ὡς δὲ ἄρα τῆς συν- 
νόμου φωνῆς τε καὶ ὀσμῆς αἱ ἔντοσθεν ἥσθοντο, 
ἀντεμυκῶντο ταῖς ἔκτοσθεν καὶ ἐγεγόνει ἡ φωνὴ 
1 ὃν added by Usener, Cobet. 


2 φανησομένης A: φαινομένης B. 
®zvas Cobet: τὰς O. 


126 


BOOK I. 39, 2-3 


of that region, named Cacus, chanced to come upon 
the cattle feeding with none to guard them and 
longed to possess them. But seeing Hercules lying 
there asleep, he imagined he could not drive them 
all away without being discovered and at the same 
time he perceived that the task was no easy one, 
either. So he secreted a few of them in the cave 
hard by, in which he lived, dragging each of them 
thither by the tail backwards. This might have 
destroyed all evidence of his theft, as the direction 
in which the oxen had gone would be at variance with 
their tracks. Hercules, then, arising from sleep soon 
afterwards, and having counted the cattle and found 
some were missing, was for some time at a loss to 
guess where they had gone, and supposing them 
to have strayed from their pasture, he sought them 
up and down the region; then, when he failed to 
find them, he came to the cave, and though he was 
deceived by the tracks, he felt, nevertheless, that he 
ought to search the place. But Cacus stood before 
the door, and when Hercules inquired after the cattle, 
denied that he had seen them, and when the other 
desired to search the cave, would not suffer him to 
do so, but called upon his neighbours for assistance, 
complaining of the violence offered to him by the 
stranger. And while Hercules was puzzled to know 
how he should act in the matter, he hit upon the 
expedient of driving the rest of the cattle to the cave. 
And thus, when those inside heard the lowing and 
perceived the smell of their companions outside, 
they bellowed to them in turn and thus their lowing 


ὁ τὸν χῶρον B: τὴν χώραν R, ὃ δεῖν Schmitz: εἶναι Ο, 


121 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


4 αὐτῶν κατήγορος τῆς κλοπῆς. ὁ μὲν οὖν Kaxos, 
ἐπειδὴ περιφανὴς ἐγένετο κακουργῶν, τρέπεται 
πρὸς ἀλκὴν καὶ τοὺς εἰωθότας αὐτῷ συναγραυλεῖν 
ἀνεκάλει- ᾿ρακλῆς δὲ ἀλοιῶν' αὐτὸν τῷ ῥοπάλῳ 

~ > 
κτείνει, καὶ Tas βοῦς ἐξαγαγών, ἐπειδὴ κακούργων 
ὑποδοχαῖς εὔθετον ἑώρα τὸ χωρίον, ἐπικατασκάπτει 
τῷ κλωπὶ" τὸ σπήλαιον. ἁγνίσας δὲ τῷ ποταμῷ 
κ / ς 4 / ~ / \ 2 ,ὔ 
τὸν φόνον ἱδρύεται πλησίον τοῦ τόπου Διὸς Εὑρεσίου 
/ a 3 ~ 6 ͵7ὔ \ ~ / 4 
βωμόν, ὅς ἐστι τῆς “Ρώμης παρὰ τῇ Τριδύμῳ πύλῃ, 
καὶ θύει τῷ θεῷ δάμαλιν ἕνα τῆς εὑρέσεως τῶν βοῶν 
χαριστήριον. ταύτην ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ τὴν θυσίαν 7 ‘Pw- 
ε ~ 
μαίων πόλις συνετέλει, νομίμοις “EAAnvixots ἅπασιν 
ἐν αὐτῇ χρωμένη, καθάπερ ἐκεῖνος κατεστήσατο. 
XL. Of 8é ABopryives καὶ τῶν Ἀρκάδων ot τὸ 
Παλλάντιον κατοικοῦντες, ὡς τοῦ τε Κάκου τὸν 
4 » A \ € , > ~ Ἁ 
θάνατον ἔγνωσαν καὶ τὸν ᾿Ηρακλέα εἶδον, τῷ μὲν 
> / \ A ε 4 ~ \ A »Μ , 
ἀπεχθόμενοι διὰ τὰς ἁρπαγάς, τοῦ δὲ τὴν ὄψιν ἐκ- 
~ ι > ~ ~ 
παγλούμενοι θεῖόν τι χρῆμα ἐνόμισαν ὁρᾶν Kal τοῦ 
λῃστοῦ μέγα εὐτύχημα τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν 3 ἐποιοῦντο. 
c \ , ΡΣ ~ 4 4 / a 
ot δὲ πένητες αὐτῶν κλάδους δρεψάμενοι δάφνης, 7 
πολλὴ περὶ τὸν τόπον ἐφύετο, ἐκεῖνόν τε καὶ 
e A > ,ὔ = \ ς ~ >] ~ > ‘\ 
αὑτοὺς ἀνέστεφον, ἧκον δὲ ot βασιλεῖς αὐτῶν ἐπὶ 
’ὔ κ ς / ~ e \ \ » 
ξένια τὸν ᾿Πρακλέα καλοῦντες. ὡς δὲ καὶ τοὔνομα 
καὶ τὸ γένος αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰς πράξεις διεξιόντος 
~ 7 ~ 
ἔμαθον, ἐνεχείριζον αὐτῷ τήν τε χώραν Kal σφᾶς 
Ἁ » ~ 
2 αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ dirta. Evavdpos δὲ παλαίτερον ἔτι τῆς 
΄σ ") 
Θέμιδος ἀκηκοὼς διεξιούσης, ὅτι πεπρωμένον εἴη 
1 ἁλοιῶν R: ἀλύων Bb; ἀλοῶν Reudler. 


2 τῶ κλωπὶ ΒΡ, τῶ κάλωπι Ba: τῇ καλαύροπι A, Jacoby. 
*Schwartz: ἀποβολὴν O, Jacoby. 


128 


BOOK I. 39, 4-40, 2 


betrayed the theft. Cacus, therefore, when his 
thievery was thus brought to light, put himself upon 
his defence and began to call out to his fellow herds- 
men. But Hercules killed him by smiting him with 
his club and drove out the cattle; and when he saw 
that the place was well adapted to the harbouring 
of evil-doers, he demolished the cave, burying 
the robber under its ruins. Then, having purified 
himself in the river from the murder, he erected 
an altar near the place to Jupiter the Discoverer,! 
which is now in Rome near the Porta Trigemina, 
and sacrificed a calf to the god as a thank-offering 
for the finding of his cattle. This sacrifice the city of 
Rome continued to celebrate even down to my day, 
observing in it all the ceremonies of the Greeks 
just as he instituted them. 

XL. When the Aborigines and the Arcadians 
who lived at Pallantium learned of the death of 
Cacus and saw Hercules, they thought themselves 
very fortunate in being rid of the former, whom they 
detested for his robberies, and were struck with awe 
at the appearance of the latter, in whom they seemed 
to see something divine. The poorer among them, 
plucking branches of laurel which grew there in 
great plenty, crowned both him and _ themselves 
with it ; and their kings also came to invite Hercules 
to be their guest. But when they heard from him 
his name, his lineage and his achievements, they 
recommended both their country and themselves 
to his friendship. And Evander, who had even 
before this heard Themis relate that it was ordained 


1 Jupiter Inventor. 


129 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τὸν ἐκ Διὸς καὶ Ἀλκμήνης γενόμενον “Hpakréa 
διαμείψαντα τὴν θνητὴν φύσιν ἀθάνγατον ενέσθαι 
δι᾿ ἀρετήν, ἐπειδὴ τάχιστα ὅστις ἦν ἐπύθετο, 
ὔ / “ > / «ς / 
φθάσαι βουλόμενος ἅπαντας ἀνθρώπους “Hpakréa 
~ - ~ ε 
θεῶν τιμαῖς πρῶτος ἱλασάμενος, βωμὸν αὐτοσχέδιον 
«ς \ ~ « / \ / Μ 7 \ 
ὑπὸ σπουδῆς ἱδρύεται καὶ δάμαλιν alvya θύει πρὸς 
αὐτῷ, τὸ θέσφατον ἀφηγησάμενος ᾿Ηρακλεῖ καὶ 
δεηθεὶς τῶν ἱερῶν κατάρξασθαι. ἀγασθεὶς δὲ 
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους τῆς φιλοξενίας ᾿Ηρακλῆς, τὸν μὲν 
δῆμον ἑστιάσει ὑποδέχεται θύσας τῶν βοῶν τινας 
A ~ Μ / \ / > / \ \ 
Kal τῆς ἄλλης λείας τὰς δεκάτας ἐξελών" τοὺς δὲ 
βασιλεῖς χώρᾳ πολλῇ δωρεῖται Λιγύων τε καὶ τῶν 
ἄλλων προσοίκων, ἧς μέγα ἐποιοῦντο ἄρχειν, παρα- 
νόμους τινὰς ἐξ αὐτῆς ἐκβαλὼν ἀνθρώπους. λέγεται 
δὲ πρὸς τούτοις, ὡς καὶ δέησίν τινα ποιήσαιτο τῶν 
- > 
ἐπιχωρίων, ἐπειδὴ πρῶτοι θεὸν αὐτὸν ἐνόμισαν, 
~ / 
ὅπως ἀθανάτους αὐτῷ διαφυλάττωσι τὰς τιμάς, 
θύοντες μὲν ἄζυγα δάμαλιν ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος, ἁγιστεύ- 
A A 4 / » ¢ ~ ‘ ¢ 
οντες δὲ τὴν ἱερουργίαν ἔθεσιν ᾿ Βλληνικοῖς - καὶ ὡς 
διδάξειεν αὐτὸς ' τὰς θυσίας, ἵνα διὰ παντὸς αὐτῷ 
~ > ~ 
κεχαρισμένα θύοιεν, οἴκους δύο τῶν émdavav2 
Ss ὃ \ A θ / / \ “ENA 4, ς 
εἶναι δὲ τοὺς μαθόντας τότε τὴν ηνικὴν ἱερουρ- 
/ / \ / > > 5 \ / 
γίαν Ποτιτίους te καὶ I[Iwapiovs, ἀφ᾽ ὧν τὰ γένη 
διαμεῖναι μέχρι πολλοῦ τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ποιούμενα 
τῶν θυσιῶν, ὡς ἐκεῖνος κατεστήσατο, []οτιτίων μὲν 
΄σ ~ > / > 
ἡγουμένων τῆς ἱερουργίας καὶ τῶν ἐμπύρων ἀπαρ- 
χομένων, [Πιναρίων δὲ σπλάγχνων τε μετουσίας 
~ > = “ 7 
εἰργομένων καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἐχρῆν ὑπ᾽ ἀμφοῖν γίνεσθαι 
1 αὐτὸς Reiske: αὐτοὺς O, Jacoby. 
2 ἐπιφανῶν Β, Reiske: ἐπιφανῶν παραλαβών R, Jacoby. 


130 


BOOK T. 40, 2-4 


by fate that Hercules, the son of Jupiter and Alemena. 
changing his mortal nature, should become immortal 
by reason of his virtue, as soon as he learned who 
the stranger was, resolved to forestall all mankind 
by being the first to propitiate Hercules with divine 
honours, and he hastily erected an improvised altar 
and sacrificed upon it a calf that had not known 
the yoke, having first communicated the oracle to 
Hercules and asked him to perform the initial rites. 
And Hercules, admiring the hospitality of these 
men, entertained the common people with a feast, 
after sacrificing some of the cattle and setting apart 
the tithes of the rest of his booty; and to their 
kings he gave a large district belonging to the 
Ligurians and to some others of their neighbours, 
the rule of which they very much desired, after he 
had first expelled some lawless people from it. It 
is furthermore reported that he asked the inhabit- 
ants, since they were the first who had regarded 
him as a god, to perpetuate the honours they had 
paid him by offering up every year a calf that had 
not known the yoke and performing the sacrifice 
with Greek rites; and that he himself taught the 
sacrificial rites to two of the distinguished families, 
in order that their offerings might always be accept- 
able to him. Those who were then instructed in 
the Greek ceremony, they say, were the Potitii and 
the Pinarii. whose descendants continued for a long 
time to have the superintendence of these sacrifices, 
in the manner he had appointed, the Potitii presid- 
ing at the sacrifice and taking the first part of the 
burnt-offerings, while the Pinarii were excluded from 
tasting the inwards and held second rank in those 
ceremonies which had to be performed by both of 


131 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τὴν δευτέραν τιμὴν ἐχόντων. ταύτην δὲ αὐτοῖς 
προστεθῆναι τὴν ἀτιμίαν ὀψίμου τῆς παρουσίας 
σ΄ > \ - > - \ σ΄ > 
ἕνεκα, ἐπειδὴ ἕωθεν αὐτοῖς κελευσθὲν ἥκειν ἐσπλαγ- 
~ ¢ ~ ~ 
χνευμένων ἤδη τῶν ἱερῶν ἀφίκοντο. νῦν μέντοι 
οὐκέτι τοῖς γένεσι τούτοις ἡ περὶ τὰς ἱερουργίας 
> / > / > A A > ~ / 
ἐπιμέλεια ἀνάκειται, ἀλλὰ παῖδες ἐκ τοῦ δημοσίου 
>] \ ὃ ~ ’ / 1 ὃ 3 Δ δὲ ΦΕΥ͂ \ Ξθ 
ὠνητοὶ δρῶσιν αὐτάς. δι᾽ ἃς δὲ αἰτίας τὸ ἔθος 
~ > 
μετέπεσε Kal Tis ἡ τοῦ δαίμονος ἐπιφάνεια περὶ 
τὴν ἀλλαγὴν τῶν ἱεροποιῶν ἐγένετο, ἐπειδὰν κατὰ 
τοῦτο γένωμαι τοῦ λόγου τὸ μέρος, διηγήσομαι. 
¢ δὲ / 9 45 φ' A ὃ / > 45) 2 
ὁ δὲ βωμός, ep οὗ Tas δεκάτας ἀπέθυσεν 
~ - € 
“Ηρακλῆς, καλεῖται μὲν ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων Μέγιστος, 
ἔστι δὲ τῆς 5 Βοαρίας λεγομένης ἀγορᾶς πλησίον, 
ἁγιστευόμενος εἰ καί τις ἄλλος ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων" 
3. Κ᾿ ~ ~ A 
ὅρκοι Te yap ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ καὶ συνθῆκαι τοῖς Bovdo- 
μένοις βεβαίως τι διαπράττεσθαι καὶ δεκατεύσεις 
3 ~ 
χρημάτων γίνονται συχναὶ κατ᾽ εὐχάς" TH μέντοι 
~ ~ > 
κατασκευῇ πολὺ τῆς δόξης ἐστὶ καταδεέστερος" 
πολλαχῇ δὲ καὶ ἄλλῃ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας ἀνεῖται τεμένη 
τῷ θεῷ καὶ βωμοὶ κατὰ πόλεις τε ἵδρυνται καὶ 
παρ᾽ ὁδούς, καὶ σπανίως ἂν εὕροι τις ᾿Ιταλίας 
χῶρον ἔνθα μὴ τυγχάνει τιμώμενος ὁ θεός. ὁ 
μὲν οὖν μυθικὸς λόγος ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τοιόσδε παρα- 
δέδοται. 
* ~ 

XLI. ‘O δ᾽ ἀληθέστερος, ᾧ πολλοὶ τῶν ἐν 

ἱστορίας σχήματι τὰς πράξεις αὐτοῦ διηγησαμένων 
/ 
ἐχρήσαντο, τοιόσδε: ὡς στρατηλάτης γενόμενος 
Ι αὐτὰς Bb: αὐταῖς Ba, αὐτοῖς A, 


2Kriiger: ἐπέθυσεν Ο. 
3775 added by Kiessling. 


132 


BOOK I. 40, 4-41, 1 


them together. It is said that this disgrace was 
fixed upon them for having been late in arriving ; 
for though they had been ordered to be present 
early in the morning, they did not come till the en- 
trails had been eaten. To-day, however, the super- 
intendence of the sacrifices no longer devolves on 
these families, but slaves purchased with the public 
money perform them. For what reasons this 
custom was changed and how the god manifested 
himself concerning the change in his ministers, I 
shall relate when I come to that part of the history.! 
The altar on which Hercules offered up the tithes is 
called by the Romans the Greatest Altar.? It stands 
near the place they call the Cattle Market 3 and no 
other is held in greater veneration by the inhabitants ; 
for upon this altar oaths are taken and agreements 
made by those who wish to transact any business 
unalterably and the tithes of things are frequently 
offered there pursuant to vows. However, in its 
construction it is much inferior to its reputation. 
In many other places also in Italy precincts are 
dedicated to this god and altars erected to him, 
both in cities and along highways; and one could 
scarcely find any place in Italy in which the god 
is not honoured. Such, then, is the legendary 
account that has been handed down concerning him. 

XLI. But the story which comes nearer to the 
truth and which has been adopted by many who 
have narrated his deeds in the form of history 
is as follows: Hercules, who was the greatest 


1 In a portion of the work now lost, 
2 Ara maxima. 
8 Forum boarium. 


133 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ε / / ~ = Lae - \ « ~ \ 
ἁπάντων κράτιστος τῶν καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ᾿“Ηρακλῆς καὶ 
~ e / LA > ~ \ 
δυνάμεως πολλῆς ἡγούμενος ἅπασαν ἐπῆλθε τὴν 
Α ~ 
ἐντὸς ᾽Ωκεανοῦ, καταλύων μὲν εἴ τις εἴη τυραννὶς 
- - > Ἃ 
βαρεῖα καὶ λυπηρὰ τοῖς ἀρχομένοις ἢ πόλις ὑβρί- 
\ / A / a“ / 1 > 
fovea καὶ λωβωμένη τὰς πέλας ἢ ἡγεμονία ᾿ ἀν- 
/ 
θρώπων ἀνημέρῳ διαίτῃ καὶ ξενοκτονίαις ἀθεμίτοις ὃ 
/ 
χρωμένων, καθιστὰς δὲ νομίμους βασιλείας Kat 
\ / \ / “0 Ad θ 
σωφρονικὰ πολιτεύματα καὶ βίων ἔθη φιλάνθρωπα 
καὶ κοινοπαθῆ" πρὸς δὲ τούτοις “λλησί τε βαρ- 
βάρους συγκεραννύμενος καὶ θαλαττίοις ἠπειρώτας, 
a 2 ok » ee / > e , 
οἵ τέως ἀπίστους Kai ἀσυναλλάκτους εἶχον ὁμιλίας, 
> ’ὔ a / > / \ \ 
ἐρήμῳ τε γῇ πόλεις ἐνιδρυόμενος καὶ ποταμοὺς 
/ 
ἐκτρέπων ἐπικλύζοντας πεδία Kal τρίβους ἐκτέμνων 
5 / Μ \ > / « σ 
ἀβάτοις ὄρεσι καὶ τἄλλα μηχανώμενος, ὡς ἅπασα 
~ \ 4, \ - ¢ /, 
γῆ καὶ θάλαττα κοινὴ ταῖς ἁπάντων χρείαις γενή- 
> / \ 3 3 / ’ , 
σοιτο. ἀφίκετο δὲ εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν οὐ μονόστολος 
οὐδὲ ἀγέλην" βοῶν ἐπαγόμενος (οὔτε γὰρ ὁ 
~ > / ~ > ” > > / > 
χῶρος ἐν τρίβῳ τοῖς εἰς “Apyos ἐξ ᾿Ιβηρίας ava- 
~ - 7 \ / 
κομιζομένοις, οὔτε τοῦ διελθεῖν ἕνεκα THY χώραν 
/ Ἃ » 50 ~ ἰλλ᾽ ἂν εὖἢἋ ὃ λ / \ 
τοσαύτης av ἠξιώθη τιμῆς) ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ δουλώσει Kat 
~ ΄σ ~ > \ Μ 
ἀρχῇ τῶν τῇδε ἀνθρώπων στρατὸν ἄγων πολὺν 
᾿]Ιβηρίαν ἠδ νος " διατρῖψαί τε αὐτόθι 
ηρίαν ἤδη κεχειρωμένος - διατρῖ T 
/ / » “4 “ ~ ~ 
πλείω χρόνον ἠναγκάσθη τοῦ τε ναυτικοῦ TH 
5 ,ὔ Δ» / ~ > / \ ~ 
ἀπουσίᾳ, ἣ ἐγένετο χειμῶνος ἐπιλαβόντος," καὶ τῷ 


1 ἢ ἡγεμονία Kiessling, ἢ ἡγεμὼν Sintenis, ἢ μοναὶ Meineke: 
ἡγεμονίας R, ἡγεμονείας Β. 

2Steph.: ἀθεμίστοις AB, Jacoby. 

8 ἀγέλην R; ἀγέλη B. 

4 ἐπαγόμενος Ab; ἑπάμενος Aa, σπόμενος B; ἑπόμενος 
Kiessling. 


134 


BOOK I. 41, 1-2 


commander of his age, marched at the head of a large 
force through all the country that lies on this side 
of the Ocean, destroying any despotisms that were 
grievous and oppressive to their subjects, or common- 
wealths that outraged and injured the neighbour- 
ing states, or organized bands of men who lived in 
the manner of savages and lawlessly put strangers 
to death, and in their room establishing lawful 
monarchies, well-ordered governments arid humane 
and sociable modes of life. Furthermore, he mingled 
barbarians with Greeks, and inhabitants of the 
inland with dwellers on the sea coast, groups which 
hitherto had been distrustful and unsocial in their 
dealings with each other; he also built cities in 
desert places, turned the course of rivers that over- 
flowed the fields, cut roads through inaccessible 
mountains, and contrived other means by which 
every land and sea might lie open to the use of all 
mankind. And he came into Italy not alone nor 
yet bringing a herd of cattle (for neither does this 
country lie on the road of those returning from 
Spain to Argos nor would he have been deemed 
aris of so great honour merely for passing through 

it), but at the head of a great army, after he ead 
already conquered Spain, in order to subjugate and 
rule the people in this region; and he was obliged 
to tarry there a considerable time both because of 
the absence of his fleet, due to stormy weather that 


5 ἀνακομιζομένοις Steph.?, ἀνασκευαζομένοις Steph.*, Jacoby: 


ἀναγκαζομένοις AB. 
5 ἐπιλαβόντος Cmg, Sintenis; ἐπιβαλόντος ΑΒ. 


135 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μὴ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τὰ κατέχοντα ᾿Ϊταλίαν προσ- 
χωρῆσαι αὐτῷ ἑκούσια χωρὶς γὰρ τῶν ἄλλων 
> 
βαρβάρων τὸ Λιγύων γένος πολὺ καὶ μάχιμον, ἐπὶ 
ταῖς παρόδοις τῶν Αἀλπείων ὁρῶν ἱδρυμένον, ἀπο- 
4 σ΄ \ > \ » ~ \ > > ’ 
κωλύειν ὅπλοις τὰς εἰσβολὰς αὐτοῦ τὰς εἰς ᾿Ϊταλίαν 
ἐπεχείρησεν, ἔνθα μέγιστος ἀγὼν τοῖς “Ἕλλησιν 
ἐγένετο πάντων αὐτοὺς ἐπιλειπόντων ἐν τῇ μάχῃ 
~ ~ A \ \ / / ~ 
τῶν βελῶν. δηλοῖ δὲ τὸν πόλεμον τόνδε τῶν 
3 / ~ > / > ~ ’ὔ 
ἀρχαίων ποιητῶν Αἰσχύλος ἐν Προμηθεῖ λυομένῳ. 
΄ ¢ ΄- 
πεποίηται γὰρ αὐτῷ ὁ Προμηθεὺς “Ηρακλεῖ τά τε 
ἄλλα προλέγων, ὡς ἕκαστον αὐτῷ τι συμβήσεσθαι 
” \ \ Der ‘ / \ \ 
ἔμελλε κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ [ηρυόνην στρατείαν, καὶ δὴ 
καὶ περὶ τοῦ Λιγυστικοῦ πολέμου ὡς οὐ ῥάδιος ὁ 
ἀγὼν ἔσται διηγούμενος. τὰ δὲ ποιήματα ὧδ᾽ ἔχει" 


σ \ / > > / ΄ 
ἥξεις δὲ Λιγύων εἰς ἀτάρβητον στρατόν, 

»” > ᾽ / / > > \ ~ / Ἃ 
ἔνθ᾽ οὐ μάχης, σάφ᾽ οἶδα, καὶ θοῦρός περ ὧν 
μέμψει. πέπρωται γάρ σε καὶ βέλη λιπεῖν. 


XLIL. ᾿Επειδὴ δὲ τούτους καταστρεψάμενος τῶν 
παρόδων ἐκράτησεν, οἱ μέν τινες ἑκούσιοι παρεδί- 
δοσαν αὐτῷ τὰς πόλεις, μάλιστα δὲ ὅσοι ἀπὸ τοῦ 
“Ελληνικοῦ γένους ἦσαν ἢ δυνάμεις οὐκ εἶχον 
ἀξιοχρέους, οἱ δὲ πλείους ἐκ πολέμου καὶ πολι- 
ορκίας παρίσταντο. ἐν δὴ τούτοις Tots! μάχῃ 
κρατηθεῖσι καὶ τὸν ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων μυθολογούμενον 
Κάκον, δυνάστην τινὰ κομιδῇ βάρβαρον καὶ ἀνθρώ- 
πων ἀνημέρων ἄρχοντα, γενέσθαι φασὶν αὐτῷ διά- 
φορον, ἐρυμνοῖς χωρίοις ἐπικαθήμενον καὶ διὰ ταῦτα 


+ τρῖς added by Reiske, 
136 


BOOK I. 41, 2-42, 2 


detained it, and because not all the nations of Italy 
willingly submitted to him. For, besides the other 
barbarians, the Ligurians, a numerous and warlike 
people seated in the passes of the Alps, endeavoured 
to prevent his entrance into Italy by force of arms, 
and in that place so great a battle was fought by 
the Greeks that all their missiles gave out in the 
course of the fighting. This war is mentioned by 
Aeschylus, among the ancient poets, in his Prometheus 
Unbound ; for there Prometheus is represented 
as foretelling to Hercules in detail how everything 
else was to befall him on his expedition against 
Geryon and in particular recounting to him the 
difficult struggle he was to have in the war with the 
Ligurians. The verses are these: 


* And thou shalt come to Liguria’s dauntless host, 
Where no fault shalt thou find, bold though thou 
art, 
With the fray: 115 fated thy missiles all shall 
1 gd 


XLII. After Hercules had defeated this people 
and gained the passes, some delivered up their cities 
to him of their own accord, particularly those who 
were of Greek extraction or who had no considerable 
forces; but the greatest part of them were re- 
duced by war and siege. Among those who were 
conquered in battle, they say, was Cacus, who is 
celebrated in the Roman legend, an exceedingly 
barbarous chieftain reigning over a savage people, 
who had set himself to oppose Hercules; he was 
established in the fastnesses and on that account 


* Nauck, 7.G.P.*, p. 66, irg. 199. 
137 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


A / »Μ ΄ a > A 
τοῖς πλησιοχώροις ὄντα λυπηρόν. ὃς ἐπειδὴ κατα- 
στρατοπεδεύσαντα τὸν ᾿Ηρακλέα ἔμαθεν ἐν τῷ 
προσεχεῖ πεδίῳ, λῃστρικῶς διασκευασάμενος ἐπι- 
δρομῇ αἰφνιδίῳ ἐχρήσατο κατακοιμωμένου τοῦ 
στρατοῦ καὶ τῆς λείας ὅσῃ ἐπέτυχεν ἀφυλάκτῳ 
περιβαλόμενος ἀπήλασεν. ὕστερον δὲ κατακλει- 

\ e \ ~ « ’ > / / 
σθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Ελλήνων εἰς πολιορκίαν, τά τε 

4 \ / ἁλό > 2 > - 3 \ > ‘ > 

φρούρια κατὰ κράτος ἁλόντ᾽ " ἐπεῖδε ἃ καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν 
τοῖς ἐρύμασιν ἀνῃρέθη. τῶν δὲ φρουρίων αὐτοῦ 
κατασκαφέντων τὰ πέριξ χωρία οἱ συνεξελθόντες 
Ἥ λ = \ ᾿Ξ i 5 BY > 7 

ρακλεῖ κατὰ σφᾶς ἑκάτεροι" παρέλαβον, ᾿Αρκάδες 
/ ¢ \ 3. ἡ \ ~ « ~ >) 
τέ τινες of σὺν Εὐάνδρῳ καὶ Φαῦνος ὁ τῶν ’ABo- 
ριγίνων βασιλεύς. εἰκάσειε δ᾽ ἄν τις καὶ τοὺς 
¢ / 952° A « / > \ \ 
ὑπομείναντας αὐτόθι τῶν ᾿λλήνων ᾿Επειοὺς καὶ 
τοὺς ἐκ Φενεοῦ ᾿Αρκάδας καὶ Τρῶας ἐπὶ φυλακῇ 
τῆς χώρας καταλειφθῆναι. στρατηγικὸν γὰρ δὴ 

~ ~ € 

καὶ τοῦτο τῶν ᾿Ηρακλέους ἔργων καὶ οὐδενὸς 
- / > / \ \ \ > 4 
ἧττον θαυμάζεσθαι ἐπιτήδειον, τὸ δὴ τοὺς ἀνασπά- 
στους ἐκ τῶν κεκρατημένων πόλεων τέως μὲν 
ἐπάγεσθαι κατὰ τὰς στρατείας, ἐπεὶ δὲ προθύμως 
τοὺς πολέμους συνδιενέγκαιεν εἰς τὰ δορίκτητα 
κατοικίζειν καὶ τοῖς παρ᾽ ἑτέρων ἐπιχορηγηθεῖσι 
δωρεῖσθαι πλούτοις. διὰ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα μέγιστον 
» ‘ r / Ἥ A / > >]: aA / 7 
ὄνομα καὶ κλέος “Ηρακλέους ἐν ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ γεγένηται, 
καὶ οὐ τῆς παρόδου χάριν, ἧ σεμνὸν οὐδὲν προσῆν. 


1 Kiessling: καὶ κοιμωμένου O. , 
2 Meutzner: ἑλόντων O. 8 Reiske: ἐπειδὴ O. 

4 ἐν τοῖς ἐρύμασιν B: ἀμυνόμενος A. 

δ ἑκάτεροι Reiske, ἑταῖροι Schmitz: ἕτεροι O. 

6 καὶ added by Meineke. 

?Madvig: γεγενῆσθαι R, Jacoby, γενέσθαι A. 


138 


BOOK I. 42, 2-4 


was a pest to his neighbours. He, when he heard 
that Hercules lay encamped in the plain hard by, 
equipped his followers like brigands and making a 
sudden raid while the army lay sleeping. he sur- 
rounded and drove off as much of their booty as 
he found unguarded. Afterwards, being besieged 
by the Greeks, he not only saw his forts taken by 
storm, but was himself slain amid his fastnesses. And 
when his forts had been demolished, those who had 
accompanied Hercules on the expedition (these were 
some Arcadians with Evander. and Faunus, king 
of the Aborigines) took over the districts round 
about, each group for itself. And it may be con- 
jectured that those of the Greeks who remained 
there, that is, the Epeans and the Arcadians from 
Pheneus, as well as the Trojans, were left to guard 
the country. For among the various measures of 
Hercules that bespoke the true general none was 
more worthy of admiration than his practice of 
carrying along with him for a time on his expeditions 
the prisoners taken from the captured cities, and 
then, after they had cheerfully assisted him in his 
wars, settling them in the conquered regions and 
bestowing on them the riches he had gained from 
others. It was because of these deeds that Hercules 
gained the greatest name and renown in Italy, and 
not because of his passage through it, which was 
attended by nothing worthy of veneration. 


139 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


XLII. Aéyovor δέ τινες αὐτὸν καὶ παῖδας ἐν 
- ͵ ~ ¢ ~ «- 
τοῖς χωρίοις τούτοις, ἃ νῦν “Ρωμαῖοι κατοικοῦσιν, 
> δι 4 ~ / ~ / 
ex δύο γυναικῶν γενομένους καταλιπεῖν - Π]}άλλαντα 
μὲν ἐκ τῆς Εὐάνδρου θυγατρός, ἡ Aaoviviay ὄνομά 
“-- [Ὡ 
φασιν εἶναι, “ατῖνον δὲ ἔκ τινος ὑπερβορίδος κόρης, 
ἣν πατρὸς εἰς ὁμηρείαν δόντος ἐπήγετο καὶ αὐτὴν 
μέχρι μέν τινος ἁγνὴν γάμων ἐφύλαττεν, ἐπεὶ δὲ 
εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν ἔπλει ἐρασθεὶς ἐγκύμονα ποιεῖ, Kai} 
σ Qo \ > ΄ > » » ~ ~ ~ 
ὅτε δὴ ἀπαίρειν ets Ἄργος ἔμελλε τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν 
᾿Αβοριγίνων Φαύνῳ γυναῖκα ποιήσασθαι δίδωσι: δι᾽ 
ἣν αἰτίαν τοὺς πολλοὺς τὸν Λατῖνον τούτου υἱὸν 
« / 
νομίζειν, οὐχ ᾿Ηρακλέους. I[laAAav7a μὲν οὖν 
\ e ~ / > - - \ > 
πρὶν ἡβῆσαι λέγουσιν ἀποθανεῖν, “Λατῖνον δὲ avdpw- 
\ \ - 
θέντα τὴν ᾿Αβοριγίνων ἀρχὴν παραλαβεῖν. τούτου 
δὲ ἄπαιδος ἀρρένων παίδων τελευτήσαντος ἐν τῇ 
ς - 
πρὸς τοὺς ὁμόρους ἱ οτόλους μάχῃ περιστῆναι τὴν 
> ~ 
ἀρχὴν εἰς Αἰνείαν tov Ayyioov κηδεστὴν αὐτοῦ 
a e 
γενόμενον. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἐν ἑτέροις χρόνοις 
ἐγένετο. 
XLIV. ‘HpakdAjjs δ᾽ ἐπεὶ τά τε κατὰ τὴν ᾿Ϊταλίαν 
ἅπαντα ὡς ἐβούλετο κατεστήσατο καὶ ὁ ναυτικὸς 
~ \ ~ > > > 
αὐτῷ στρατὸς σῶος ἐξ ᾿Ιβηρίας ἀφίκετο, θύσας 
τοῖς θεοῖς τὰς δεκάτας τῶν λαφύρων καὶ πολίχνην 
2 ~ U ~ 
ἐπώνυμον αὑτοῦ κτίσας, ἔνθα 6 στόλος αὐτῷ ἐναυ- 
wa ο ~ « > 
Aoxeito,* ἣ καὶ νῦν ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων οἰκουμένη Νέας 
‘ > ~ 
Πόλεως καὶ Ilopanias ἐν μέσῳ κεῖται ὃ λιμένας ἐν 
‘ ES β β / » δόξ \ ζήλ 
παντὶ καιρῷ βεβαίους ἔχουσα, δόξης τε καὶ ζήλου 
~ ? Ἁ ΄ ~ ? ~ 
καὶ τιμῶν ἰσοθέων παρὰ πᾶσι τοῖς οἰκοῦσιν ἐν 
1 καὶ Kiessling: ἣν κα. Ο. 
ὃ ἐναυλοχεῖτο (ἐναυτολοχεῖτο Aa) O: ἐναυλόχει Cobet, Jacoby, 


140 


BOOK I. 43, 1-44, 1 


XLIII. Some say that he also left sons by two 
women in the region now inhabited by the Romans. 
One of these sons was Pallas, whom he had by the 
daughter of Evander, whose name, they say, was 
Lavinia; the other, Latinus, whose mother was a 
certain Hyperborean girl whom he brought with 
him as a hostage given to him by her father and 
preserved for some time untouched; but while he 
was on his voyage to Italy, he fell in love with her 
and got her with child. And when he was preparing 
to leave for Argos, he married her to Faunus, king of 
the Aborigines ; for which reason Latinus is gener- 
ally looked upon as the son of Faunus, not of Hercules. 
Pallas, they say, died before he arrived at puberty ; 
but Latinus, upon reaching man’s estate, succeeded 
to the kingdom of the Aborigines, and when he was 
killed in the battle against the neighbouring Ru- 
tulians, without leaving any male issue, the kingdom 
devolved on Aeneas, the son of Anchises, his son-in- 
law. But these things happened at other times. 

XLIV. After Hercules had settled everything in 
Italy according to his desire and his naval force 
had arrived in safety from Spain, he sacrificed to 
the gods the tithes of his booty and built a small 
town named after himself! in the place where his 
fleet lay at anchor (it is now occupied by the Romans, 
and lying as it does between Neapolis and Pompeii, 
has at all times secure havens); and having gained 
fame and glory and received divine honours from 


1 Herculaneum. 





* Bicheler: κειμένη Bb, space left blank in ABa. 
141 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


9 - 

2 ᾿Ιταλίᾳ τυχὼν ἀπῆρεν εἰς Σικελίαν. οἱ δὲ κατα- 

/ e > > ~ \ \ > 7 > / 
λειφθέντες ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ φρουροὶ καὶ οἰκήτορες ᾿Ϊταλίας 
οἱ περὶ τὸν Σατόρνιον ὄχθον ἱδρυμένοι τέως μὲν 
ἐπολιτεύοντο καθ᾽ ἑαυτούς, χρόνῳ δ᾽ ὕστερον οὐ 
μακρῷ δίαιτάν τε καὶ νόμους καὶ θεῶν ἱερὰ συνενεγ- 

4 A / a 3 / σ 3 / 
κάμενοι τὰ σφέτερα τοῖς Αβοριγίνων ὥσπερ ᾿Αρκάδες 
καὶ ἔτι πρότερον [Ϊελασγοὶ πόλεώς τε τῆς αὐτῆς τοῖς 
ἈΑβοριγῖσι κοινωνήσαντες συνέβη ταν ὁμοεθνεῖς νομί- 
ριγῖσι ες συνέβη μ 
΄ / \ 
ζεσθαι. ‘HpaxdAégovs μὲν δὴ στρατείας πέρι καὶ [1ε- 
~ > = 
λοποννησίων ὑπομονῆς ev ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ τοσαῦτα εἰρήσθω. 
8 δευτέρᾳ δ᾽ ὕστερον γενεᾷ μετὰ τὴν ᾿ΗΠρακλέους 
ἄπαρσιν, ἔτει δὲ πέμπτῳ καὶ πεντηκοστῷ μάλιστα, 
e > * € ~ / A v 5» / 
ws αὐτοὶ Ρωμαῖοι λέγουσι, βασιλεὺς μὲν ‘ABopryi- 
> = € 7 , . , 

νων ἦν Λατῖνος 6 Davvov, γόνος δὲ “Ηρακλέους, 

πέμπτον δὲ καὶ τριακοστὸν ἔτος ἔχων τὴν ἀρχήν. 
XLV. Kara δὲ τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον Τρῶες οἱ σὺν 
Αἰνείᾳ διαφυγόντες ἐξ ᾽Ιλίου τῆς πόλεως ἁλούσης 
/ 2 A 4 2 > Ao "A 4 > .% 
κατέσχον εἰς Aavpevtov,” αἰγιαλὸν Afopryivwr ἐπὶ 
τῷ Τυρρηνικῷ πελάγει κείμενον, οὐ πρόσω τῶν 
ἐκβολῶν τοῦ Τεβέριος: λαβόντες δὲ παρὰ τῶν 
ABoprywwv χωρίον εἰς οἴκησιν καὶ ὅσα ἠξίουν, 
Φι 8 
πολίζονται μικρὸν ἀποσχόντες ἀπὸ θαλάττης ἐπὶ 
λόφῳ τινὲ Aaoviviov ὄνομα τῇ πόλει θέμενοι. 

5Ὰ 7 i > “ / \ > / 3 7 
2 ὀλίγῳ δ᾽ ὕστερον χρόνῳ τὴν ἀρχαίαν ἀλλάξαντες 
ὀνομασίαν ἅμα τοῖς ᾿Αβοριγῖσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως 
~ - \ 

τῆς χώρας Aativo. ὠνομάσθησαν: Kat μετανα- 

~ - “ “- > 
στάντες ἐκ τοῦ Aaoviviov κοινῇ μετὰ τῶν ἐπι- 

1 Reiske: τοιαῦτα ΑΒ. 


2 Cary (cf. Aavpértov, ν. 54. “αυρεντίνων, v. 61): Awpevrov 
O, Jacoby (and so in i. 53, 55, 63). 


142 


BOOK IT. 44, 2-45, 2 


all the inhabitants of Italy, he set sail for Sicily. 
Those who were left behind by him as a garrison to 
dwell in Italy and were settled around the Saturnian 
hill lived for some time under an independent 
government ; but not long afterwards they adapted 
their manner of life, their laws and their religious 
ceremonies to those of the Aborigines, even as the 
Arcadians and, still earlier, the Pelasgians had done, 
and they shared in the same government with them, 
so that in time they came to be locked upon as of 
the same nation with them. But let this suffice 
concerning the expedition of Hercules and concern- 
ing the Peloponnesians who remained behind in 
Italy. 

In the second generation after the departure of 
Hercules, and about the fifty-fifth year, according to 
the Romans’ own account, the king of the Aborigines 
was Latinus, who passed for the son of Faunus, but 
was actually the son of Hercules; he was now in the 
thirty-fifth year of his reign. 

XLY. At that time the Trojans who had fled 
with Aeneas from Troy after its capture landed at 
Laurentum, which is on the coast of the Aborigines 
facing the Tyrrhenian sea, not far from the mouth of 
the Tiber. And baving received from the Aborigines 
some land for their habitation and everything else 
they desired, they built a town on a hill not far from 
the sea and called it Lavinium. Soon after this they 
changed their ancient name and, together with the 
Aborigines, were called Latins, after the king of that 
country. And leaving Lavinium, they joined with 
the inhabitants of those parts in building a larger 


143 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 
χωρίων μείζονα περιβάλλονται πόλιν, ἣν Ἄλβαν 
ἐκάλεσαν, ἐξ ἧς ὁρμώμενοι πολλὰς μὲν καὶ ἄλλας 
πόλεις ἔκτισαν τῶν κληθέντων IIpickwy “ατίνων, 
ἐξ ὧν αἱ πλεῖσται ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ ἦσαν οἰκούμεναι, 
γενεαῖς δ᾽ ὕστερον ἑκκαίδεκα μετ᾽ + ᾿Ϊλίου ἅλωσιν 
3 ,ὕ » / ? ‘ /, 4 A 
ἐκπέμψαντες ἀποικίαν εἰς τὸ ]]αλλάντιόν τε καὶ 
τὴν Σατορνίαν, ἔνθα []ελοποννήσιοί τε καὶ ᾿ἄρκάδες 
τὴν πρώτην οἴκησιν ἐποιήσαντο καὶ ἦν ἔτι " ζώπυρ᾽ 
ἄττα περιλειπόμενα τοῦ παλαιοῦ γένους, οἰκίζουσι 
τοὺς τόπους περιλαβόντες τείχεσι τὸ ]Π]αλλάντιον, 
ὥστε λαβεῖν πόλεως σχῆμα τότε πρῶτον. τίθενται 

\ ~ / € / y+ > \ ~ / 
δὲ τῷ κτίσματι Ρώμην ὄνομα ἀπὸ τοῦ στείλαντος 
\ > / ΞΟ 5A Δ ᾿ 4 ὃ \ ὃ / 
τὴν ἀποικίαν ᾿Ρωμύλου, ὃς ἦν ἕβδομος καὶ δέκατος 
3 > > / rs / \ \ \ ~ 
am Αἰνείου γεγονώς. βούλομαι δὲ Kai περὶ τῆς 
Αἰνείου παρουσίας εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν, ἐπεὶ τῶν συγγρα- 
/ - \ > / - \ ὃ ’ ε 
φέων τοῖς μὲν ἠγνόηται, τοῖς δὲ διαπεφώνηται ὁ 
περὶ αὐτοῦ λόγος, μὴ παρέργως διελθεῖν τάς τε 
τῶν ᾿Ελλήνων καὶ τὰς Ρωμαίων τῶν μάλιστα 
, ¢ / aA / 3 ” δὲ A 
πιστευομένων ἱστορίας παραβαλών. ἔχει δὲ τὰ 
περὶ αὐτοῦ λεγόμενα ὧδε. 
> ~ 
XLVI. ’IXiov κρατηθέντος ὑπ᾽ ᾿Αχαιῶν, εἴτε 
εἰ a ε ΄, ͵ 
τοῦ δουρείου ἵππου τῇ ἀπάτῃ, ὡς 'Ομήρῳ πεποίηται, 
εἴτε τῇ προδοσίᾳ τῶν Avrnvopidav εἴτε ἄλλως πως, 
1 μετὰ O: μετὰ τὴν Jacoby. 
2 ἔτι B: ἔτι ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν R. 
8 Reiske: παραλαβών Ο. 
144 


BOOK I. 45, 2-46, 1 


city, surrounded by a wall, which they called Alba ; 
and setting out thence, they built many other cities, 
the cities of the so-called Prisci Latini, of which 
the greatest part were inhabited even to my day. 
Then, sixteen generations after the taking of Troy, 
sending out a colony to Pallantium and Saturnia, 
where the Peloponnesians and the Arcadians had 
made their first settlement and where there were still 
left some remains of the ancient race, they settled 
these places and surrounded Pallantium with a 
wall, so that it then first received the form of a city. 
This settlement they called Rome, after Romulus, 
who was the leader of the colony and the seven- 
teenth in descent from Aeneas. But also concerning 
the arrival of Aeneas in Italy, since some historians 
have been ignorant of it and others have related it 
in a different manner, I wish to give more than a 
cursory account, having compared the histories of 
those writers, both Greek and Roman, who are the 
best accredited. The stories concerning him are as 
follows : 

XLVI. When Troy had been taken by the 
Achaeans, either by the stratagem of the wooden 
horse, as Homer represents, or by the treachery of the 


1See chap. 74, 2, and notes. We learn just below how 
the sixteen generations were reckoned: Romulus is de- 
clared to be seventeenth in descent from Aeneas. A 
comparison of the list of the Alban kings given in chaps. 70f. 
shows that, strictly speaking, he was only sixteenth in 
descent, counting inclusively ; but inasmuch as Ascanius’ 
half-brother Silvius belonged in point of time to the 
following generation, he was evidently counted as third in 
the line of descent. 


145 
VOL. I. G 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τὸ μὲν ἄλλο πλῆθος ἐν τῇ πόλει Τρωικόν τε καὶ 
συμμαχικὸν ἐν ταῖς εὐναῖς ἔτι καταλαμβανόμενον 
> 
ἐφονεύετο ἰνυκτὸς γὰρ δὴ τὸ δεινὸν ἀφυλάκτοις 
αὐτοῖς ἐπιστῆναι ἔοικενῚ, Αἰνείας δὲ καὶ of σὺν 
αὐτῷ παρόντες ᾿Ϊλιεῦσιν ἐπίκουροι Τρῶες ἐκ Aap- 
ὃ / / ‘3 / ~ » -“ 
ἄνου τε πόλεως καὶ ᾿Οφρυνίου τῶν τε ἄλλων ὅσοι 
~ / / ε / » ” 
τῆς κάτω πόλεως ἁλισκομένης ἔφθασαν αἴσθησιν 
τοῦ δεινοῦ λαβεῖν, ἐπὶ τὰ καρτερὰ τοῦ Περγάμου 
συμφυγόντες τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἰδίῳ τείχει φρουρου- 
μένην καταλαμβάνονται, ἐν ἧ καὶ ἱερὰ τὰ πατρῷα 
τοῖς Τρωσὶν ἦν καὶ χρημάτων 6 πολὺς πλοῦτος, 
οἷα εἰκὸς ἐν ἐχυρῷ, καὶ τοῦ στρατιωτικοῦ τὸ κρά- 
τιστον" ἔνθα ὑπομένοντες ἀπεκρούοντο τοὺς πειρω- 
μένους ἐπιβαίνειν τῆς ἄκρας καὶ τὸ διαπῖπτον ὑπὸ 
τῆς ἁλώσεως πλῆθος ἐμπειρίᾳ στενωπῶν ὑποθέον- 
5 / 1 \ >? / ~ λ θέ 
τες ἀνελάμβανον"; καὶ ἐγένετο τοῦ καταληφθέντος 
- \ /, \ A \ > / « \ ~ 
πλεῖον τὸ διαφυγόν. τὴν μὲν δὴ αὐτίκα ὁρμὴν τῶν 
7 a Ss 5A ὃ / Q A “Δ 
πολεμίων ἣν εἶχον, ὅλην διαχρήσασθαι τὴν πόλιν, 
καὶ τὸ μὴ πᾶν ἐξ ἐφόδου καταληφθῆναι τὸ ἄστυ 
τοῦτο τὸ μηχάνημα ἐξευρὼν Αἰνείας ἐπέσχε. 
λογισμὸν δὲ τὸν εἰκότα περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος λαμ- 
βάνων, ὡς ἀμήχανον εἴη πρᾶγμα σῶσαι πόλιν 


1 Pflugk: ἀπελάμβανον AB. 





1The tradition that Antenor proved a traitor to his 
country is late, appearing first in Lycophron’s Alexandra 
(verse 340), where the scholiast explains the cryptic words 
as meaning that Antenor raised a signal fire to the Greeks 
waiting at Tenedos and also released the Greek warriors 
from the wooden horse. Dictys relates (v. 8) that Antenor, 


146 


BOOK I. 46, 1-2 


Antenoridae,' or by some other means, the greatest 
part of the Trojans and of their allies then in the 
city were surprised and slain in their beds; for it 
seems that this calamity came upon them in the 
night, when they were not upon their guard. But 
Aeneas and his Trojan forces which he had brought 
from the cities of Dardanus and Ophrynium to the 
assistance of the people of Ilium, and as many others 
as had early notice of the calamity, while the Greeks 
were taking the lower town, fled together to the 
stronghold of Pergamus,? and occupied the citadel, 
which was fortified with its own wall; here were 
deposited the holy things of the Trojans inherited 
from their fathers and their great wealth in valu- 
ables, as was to be expected in a stronghold, and 
here also the flower of their army was stationed. 
Here they awaited and repulsed the enemy who were 
endeavouring to gain a foothold on the acropolis, 
and by making secret sallies they were able, through 
their familiarity with the narrow streets, to rescue 
the multitude which was seeking to escape at the 
taking of the city; and thus a larger number 
escaped than were taken prisoner. By hitting upon 
this plan Aeneas checked the immediate purpose of 
the enemy, which was to put all the citizens to the 
sword, and prevented them from taking the whole 
city by storm. But with respect to the future he 
reasoned very properly that it would be impossible to 


with the aid of his wife Theano, handed over the Palladium 
to Odysseus and Diomed; and Dares (41) represents 
Antenor and Aeneas as opening the Scaean gate to the 
enemy. 

* Pergamus was the citadel of Troy (Iliad iv. 508; vi. 
512). 


147 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἧς Ta πλείω ἤδη ἐκρατεῖτο, eis νοῦν βάλλεται τοῦ 
μὲν τείχους ἐρήμου παραχωρῆσαι τοῖς πολεμίοις, 
3ra δὲ σώματα αὐτὰ καὶ τὰ ἱερὰ τὰ πατρῷα καὶ 
, ς / / 4 ’ὕ / 
χρήματα ὁπόσα φέρειν δύναιτο διασώσασθαι. δόξαν 
δὲ αὐτῷ, παῖδας μὲν καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ τὰ γηραιὰ 
’; \ - ᾽ὔ » , wv ~ 
σώματα Kal ὁπόσοις ἄλλοις βραδείας ἔδει φυγῆς 
A ~ Ψ 
προεξελθεῖν κελεύει τῆς πόλεως κατὰ τὰς ἐπὶ τὴν 
ΝΜ 4 ς A a » ‘\ A Μ ε ~ 
ἴδην φερούσας ὁδοὺς, ἕως Ayatot τὴν ἄκραν ἑλεῖν 
προθυμούμενοι διώξεως τοῦ διαπίπτοντος ἐκ τῆς 
πόλεως πλήθους οὐδὲν προεμηχανῶντο, τοῦ δὲ 
~ > ~ ~ ᾽ 
στρατιωτικοῦ τὸ μὲν ἐπὶ φυλακῇ τῶν ἐξιόντων 
Ψ ς 9 / \ 5 / » ~ 
ἔταξεν, ws ἀσφαλής τε καὶ atadaimwpos ἐκ τῶν 
ἐνόντων ἡ φυγὴ αὐτοῖς γένοιτο, εἴρητο δὲ τούτοις 
‘A 7 3 ~ »Μ Α A 
τὰ καρτερώτατα καταλαβέσθαι τῆς ἤΪδης" τὸ δὲ 
\ > 
λοιπόν, ὃ δὴ κράτιστον ἦν, αὐτὸς ἔχων ὑπέμενεν 
~ \ - ~ ~ 
ἐπὶ τοῦ τείχους Kal παρεῖχε τοῖς προεξελθοῦσιν 
Ξ: ? ~ 
ἧττον ἐπιπόνους διηρτημένων τειχομαχίᾳ τῶν 
/ A / Vd A \ ~ 
4 πολεμίων tas φυγάς. Νεοπτολέμου δὲ σὺν τοῖς 
>] - 
ἀμφ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐπιβάντος μέρους τινὸς τῆς ἄκρας 
~ 5 ~ 
Kat προσβοηθησάντων αὐτοῖς ᾿Αχαιῶν ἁπάντων 
~ \ » θί > 7 δὲ 4 5A 2 
τῆς μὲν ἄκρας μεθίεται, ἀνοίξας δὲ τὰς πύλας 
/ ΕΣ 
ἀπήει συντεταγμένους ἔχων τοὺς λοιποὺς φυγάδας, 
~ / 
ἀγόμενος ἐπὶ ταῖς κρατίσταις συνωρίσι TOV TE πατέρα 
/ ~ 
καὶ θεοὺς τοὺς πατρῴους γυναῖκά τε Kal τέκνα Kal 
“- Μ ww / Μ Ss =~ Ἅ ΄- 
τῶν ἄλλων εἴ τι πλείστου ἄξιον ἦν σῶμα ἢ χρῆμα. 
XLVI. Ἔν δὲ τούτῳ κατὰ κράτος εἰλήφεσαν 
5 A A 9 
Ayaot τὴν πόλιν καὶ περὶ τὰς ἁρπαγὰς ἐσπουδα- 


1 ἡ added by Sintenis. 
2 τὰς πύλας. . . φυγάδας Kiessling: τὰς φυγάδας πύλας O; 
τὰς φηγάδας π. Meineke, τὰς φυγαδικὰς π. Madvig. 


148 


BOOK 1. 46, 2-47, 1 


save a city the greater part of which was already in 
the possession of the enemy, and he therefore decided 
to abandon the wall, bare of defenders, to the enemy 
and to save the inhabitants themselves as well as 
the holy objects inherited from their fathers and all 
the valuables he could carry away. Having thus 
resolved, he first sent out from the city the women 
and children together with the aged and all others 
whose condition required much time to make their 
escape, with orders to take the roads leading to 
Mount Ida, while the Achaeans, intent on capturing 
the citadel, were giving no thought to the pursuit 
of the multitude who were escaping from the city. 
Of the army, he assigned one part to escort the in- 
habitants who were departing, in order that their 
flight might be as safe and free from hardships as 
the circumstances would permit; and they were 
ordered to take possession of the strongest parts of 
Mount Ida. With the rest of the troops, who were 
the most valiant, he remained upon the wall of 
the citadel and, by keeping the enemy cccupied in 
assaulting it, he rendered less difficult the flight of 
those who had gone on ahead. But when Neo- 
ptolemus and his men gained a foothold on part of 
the acropolis and all the Achaeans rallied to their 
support, Aeneas abandoned the place; and opening 
the gates, he marched away with the rest of the 
fugitives in good order, carrying with him in the best 
chariots his father and the gods of his country, 
together with his wife and children and whatever 
else, either person or thing, was most precious. 
XLVII. In the meantime the Achaeans had taken 
the city by storm, and being intent on plunder, 


149 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ \ »»᾿ / - / ~ 
κότες πολλὴν ἄδειαν σώζεσθαι τοῖς φεύγουσι παρῆ- 
ε \ > \ \ > / ” - oe | e / 
Kav. οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ τὸν Αἰνείαν ἔτι καθ᾽ ὁδὸν εὑρόντες 
τοὺς σφετέρους καὶ καθ᾽ ἕν ἅπαντες γενόμενοι τὰ 
ὀχυρώτατα καταλαμβάνονται τῆς ᾿Ϊδης. ἦλθον δ᾽ 
ὡς αὐτοὺς οἵ τ᾽ ἐν Aapddvw τότε οἰκοῦντες, ὡς 
/ \ \ A > / ͵ὔ 
εἶδον φλόγα πολλὴν παρὰ τὰ εἰωθότα φερομένην 
> > / ΄ / \ / Μ 
ἐξ ᾽Ιλίου, νύκτωρ καταλιπόντες τὴν πόλιν ἔρημον, 
\ Ἂ -“ \ > / \ > / / 
χωρὶς ἢ ὅσοι σὺν ᾿Ελύμῳ καὶ Alyéotw ναυτικόν 
τι συνεσκευασμένοι ἔτυχον προεξεληλυθότες τῆς 
/ \ > > / / ¢ ~ LA 
πόλεως, καὶ ἐξ ᾿Οφρυνίου πόλεως ὁ δῆμος ἅπας 
\ > ~ Μ ~ / ~ > / 
καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων Τρωικῶν πόλεων τῆς ἐλευθερίας 
oi! περιεχόμενοι: δύναμίς τε αὕτη δι᾿ ἐλαχίστου 
~ ~ > 
χρόνου μεγίστη τῶν Τρωικῶν ἐγένετο. ot μὲν οὖν 
\ > / / > ~ / bd 4 
σὺν Αἰνείᾳ διασωθέντες ἐκ τῆς καταλήψεως ἐν τού- 
τοις ὑπομένοντες τοῖς χωρίοις οὐ διὰ μακροῦ πάλιν 
ΣΆ \ / 4 ” ~ 
ἐπὶ τὰ σφέτερα κατελεύσεσθαι ἤλπιζον τῶν πολε- 
/ > / < ‘ A > / 
μίων ἀποπλευσάντων, Ἀχαιοὶ δὲ ἀνδραποδισάμενοι 
τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὰ σύνεγγυς χωρία καὶ φρούρια δῃώ- 
σαντες παρεσκευάζοντο μὲν ὡς καὶ τοὺς ἐν τοῖς 
ὄρεσι χειρωσόμενοι. πεμψάντων δὲ κήρυκας αὐτῶν 
\ ~ 
περὶ διαλύσεων καὶ δεομένων μὴ σφᾶς εἰς ἀνάγκην 
΄- > > 
καταστῆσαι πολέμου, συνελθόντες εἰς ἐκκλησίαν 
ἐπὶ τοῖσδε ποιοῦνται πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὰς διαλύσεις" 
Αἰνείαν μὲν καὶ τοὺς σὺν αὐτῷ τὰ χρήματα φέρον- 
\ \ > 
τας ὅσα διεσώσαντο κατὰ THY φυγὴν ἐν ὡρισμένοις 
τισὶ χρόνοις ἐκ τῆς Τρωάδος ἀπελθεῖν. παραδόντας 
Axaiots τὰ φρούρια. Axasods δὲ παρασχεῖν αὐτοῖς 
τὴν ἀσφάλειαν ἐξ ἁπάσης ὅσης ἐκράτουν γῆς καὶ 
θαλάττης ἀπιοῦσι κατὰ τὰς ὁμολογίας. δεξά- 


1 of added by Sintenis. 
150 


BOOK 1. 47, 1-5 


gave those who fled abundant opportunity of making 
their escape. Aeneas and his band overtook their 
people while still on the road, and being united now 
in one body, they seized the strongest parts of Mount 
Ida. Here they were joined not only by the in- 
habitants of Dardanus, who, upon seeing a great 
and unusual fire rising from Ilium, had in the night 
left their city undefended,—all except the men with 
Elymus and Aegestus, who had got ready some ships 
and had departed even earlier.—but also by the 
whole populace of Ophrynium and by those of the 
other Trojan cities who clung to their liberty ; 
and in a very short time this force of the Trojans 
became a very large one. Accordingly, the fugitives 
who had escaped with Aeneas from the taking of the 
city and were tarrying on Mount Ida were in hopes of 
returning home soon, when the enemy should have 
sailed away; but the Achaeans, having reduced to 
slavery the people who were left in the city and in 
the places near by and having demolished the forts, 
were preparing to subdue those also who were in 
the mountains. When, however, the Trojans sent 
heralds to treat for peace and begged them not to 
reduce them to the necessity of making war, the 
Achaeans held an assembly and made peace with 
them upon the following terms: Aeneas and his 
people were to depart from the Troad with all the 
valuables they had saved in their flight within a 
certain fixed time, after first delivering up the forts 
to the Achaeans; and the Achaeans were to allow 
them a safe-conduct by land and sea throughout 
all their dominions when they departed in pursu- 
ance of these terms. Aeneas, having accepted these 


151 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δὲ ~ Ai / \ / 5» ~ ee 
μενος δὲ ταῦτα Αἰνείας Kai νομίσας ἐκ τῶν ἐνόντων 
’ > > ~ 
κράτιστα εἶναι AoKkdvov μὲν τὸν πρεσβύτατον τῶν 
» .. ~ ~ 
παίδων ἔχοντα τοῦ συμμαχικοῦ τινα μοῖραν, ἧς 
4 io A ~ \ ~ 
Φρύγιον ἦν τὸ πλεῖστον, ets τὴν Δασκυλῖτιν Kadov- 
΄ ~ ” > A « 3 / 4 a 
μένην γῆν, ἔνθα ἐστὶν ἡ Acxavia λίμνη, μετά- 
~ >? > 
πεμπτον ὑπὸ τῶν ἐγχωρίων γενόμενον ἐπὶ βασιλείᾳ 
~ Μ oA 
τοῦ ἔθνους ἀποπέμπει: καὶ wKenoev AcKavios av- 
/ / \ > / > , \ e ᾿] ‘ 
τόθι χρόνον τινὰ οὐ πολύν. ἐλθόντων δὲ ws αὐτὸν 
~ ξ ~ 
Σκαμανδρίου τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ‘Exropidav ἀφει- 


1 ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ελλάδος ὑπὸ Νεοπτολέμου, κατά- 


μένων 
> \ 3)... \ 4 > \ > / 
γων αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τὴν πατρῴαν ἀρχὴν εἰς Τροίαν 
ἀφικνεῖται. καὶ περὶ μὲν Ἀσκανίου τοσαῦτα λέ- 
γεται: τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους παῖδας Αἰνείας παραλαβὼν 
κ ‘ / \ A -“ - ~ > \ 
Kal TOV πατέρα καὶ τὰ ἕδη τῶν θεῶν, ἐπειδὴ 
/ A \ ᾽ ~ ~ A « 
παρεσκευάσθη τὸ ναυτικὸν αὐτῷ, διαπλεῖ τὸν “EA- 
λήσποντον ἐπὶ τῆς ἔγγιστα κειμένης χερρονήσου τὸν 
~ Δ ~ 
πλοῦν ποιούμενος, ἣ πρόκειται μὲν τῆς Εὐρώπης, 
- / » > a 
καλεῖται δὲ Π͵}αλλήνη. ἔθνος δ᾽ εἶχεν αὐτὴν 5 


1 ἀφειμένων Sylburg: ἀφιγμένων ABb, ἀφιγμένον Ba. 
2 αὐτὴν Sintenis: αὕτη A, ἐν αὐτῇ B. 





1 This was the region about Dascylium on the Propontis, 
near the Mysian Olympus. The Ascanian lake actually 
lay some 50 miles to the east, being just west of Nicaea. 

2 Scamandrius was Hector’s name for Astyanax (J. vi. 
402). According to the usual tradition, he was slain upon 
the capture of Troy. But the early logographers repre- 
sented him as surviving and being carried off to Greece by 
Neoptolemus. And they usually spoke also of other sons 


152 


BOOK I. 47, 5-6 


conditions, which he looked upon as the best possible 
in the circumstances, sent away Ascanius, his eldest 
son, with some of the allies, chiefly Phrygians, to the 
country of Dascylitis,! as it is called, in which lies 
the Ascanian lake, since he had been invited by the 
inhabitants to reign over them. But Ascanius did 
not tarry there for any great length of time; for when 
Scamandrius and the other descendants of Hector? 
who had been permitted by Neoptolemus to return 
home from Greece, came to him, he went to Troy, in 
order to restore them to their ancestral kingdom. 
Regarding Ascanius, then, this is ali that is told. 
As for Aeneas, after bis fleet was ready, he embarked 
with the rest of his sons and his father, taking with 
him the images of the gods, and crossing the Helles- 
pont, sailed to the nearest peninsula, which lies in 
front of Europe and is called Pallené.* This country 


of Hector (cf. Euripides, Androm. 224). There were 
various accounts of their return to the neighbourhood of 
Troy, or eventually to Troy itself, of which we have but a 
few brief fragments preserved. Two of these are found in 
Strabo (xni. 1, 52 f.; xiv. 5, 29). 

3 This is certainly a strange way of describing Pallené, 
the westernmost of the three Chalcidic peninsulas, but the 
description evidently goes back to Hellanicus (see chap. 
48, 1) or even earlier; before the Peloponnesian war this 
region was often regarded as part of Thrace. Furthermore, 
Aeneia, the town the Trojans were said to have built during 
their stay there (chap. 49, 4), was not in Pallené at all, but 
lay only a few miles south of Thessalonica, in the north- 
west corner of Chalcidicé. It would seem as if Pallené 
were used loosely here for the whole eastern shore of the 
Thermaic gulf. This is not the part of Thrace that Virgil 
had in mind as the first stopping-place of the Trojans 
(Aen. iii. 13-68); for the tomb of Polydorus was shown at 
Aenus, at the mouth of the Hebrus. 


153 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ - 
Θράκιον σύμμαχον Kpovoaiov καλούμενον ἁπάντων 
προθυμότατον τῶν συναραμένων αὐτοῖς τοῦ πολέμου. 
« ~ 
XLVIII. ‘O μὲν οὖν πιστότατος τῶν λόγων, ᾧ 
c 
͵ὕ ~ ~ ͵ὔ ¢ / > 
κέχρηται τῶν παλαιῶν συγγραφέων “EAAavixos ἐν 
- a ~ > ΄ 
τοῖς Τρωικοῖς, περὶ τῆς Αἰνείου φυγῆς τοιόσδε 
ἐστίν. εἴρηνται δὲ καὶ ἄλλοις τισὶ περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν 
οὐ κατὰ ταὐτὰ ἔχοντες λόγοι, οὗς ἧττον ἔγωγε 
τούτου πιθανοὺς εἶναι νομίζω. κρινέτω δὲ ws 
-“ ~ > / / ~ \ 
ἕκαστος τῶν ἀκουόντων βούλεται. Σοφοκλῆς μὲν 
6 τραγῳδοποιὸς ἐν “αοκόωντι δράματι μελλούσης 
ἁλίσκεσθαι τῆς πόλεως πεποίηκε τὸν Αἰνείαν 
3 / > \ » ΄ ς \ 
ἀνασκευαζόμενον εἰς τὴν “ldnv, κελευσθέντα ὑπὸ 
~ \ 5 / \ \ / φ 3 / 
τοῦ πατρὸς Ayxioov κατὰ τὴν μνήμην ὧν Ἀφροδίτη 
ἐπέσκηψε καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν νεωστὶ γενομένων περὶ τοὺς 
Μ ~ 
“αοκοωντίδας σημείων τὸν μέλλοντα ὄλεθρον τῆς 
” > 3 ~ 
πόλεως συντεκμηραμένου. ἔχει δ᾽ ἐν αὐτῷ τὰ 
> ~ > > “λ 1 / A / DO 
ἰαμβεῖα ev ἀγγέλου! προσώπῳ λεγόμενα ὧδε: 


νῦν δ᾽ ἐν πύλαισιν Αἰνέας ὁ τῆς θεοῦ 
πάρεστ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ὦμων πατέρ᾽ ἔχων κεραυνίου 
νώτου καταστάζοντα βύσσινον φάρος, 
κύκλῳ * δὲ πᾶσαν οἰκετῶν παμπληθίαν " 


1 ἐν ἀγγέλου (or ἐξαγγέλου) Kiessling: ἐν ἀγγέλω Β, ἐν ἄλλω R. 
2 κύκλῳ B: κυκλεῖ R. 





1 Miller, F.H.G. i. pp. 61 f., frg. 127. For Hellanicus 
see p. 71, n: 2. / 

2JTt is not certain whether καταστάζοντα is to be taken 
here literally (“‘dripping’’) or figuratively (“letting drop’’); 
the construction of the sentence is without exact parallel, 
but there are analogies for interpreting it to mean simply 
* letting his robe stream, or fall, down his back.”” Plutarch 
(De Virtute et Vitio, 2) took the participle in a literal sense 


154 


BOOK 1. 47, 6-48, 2 


was occupied by a Thracian people called Crusaeans, 
who were allies of the Trojans and had assisted them 
during the war with greater zeal than any of the 
others. 

XLVIII. This, then, is the most credible account 
concerning the flight of Aeneas and is the one which 
Hellanicus, among the ancient historians, adopts in 
his Troica.!_ There are different accounts given of 
the same events by some others, which I look upon 
as less probable than this. But let every reader 
judge as he thinks proper. Sophocles, the tragic 
poet, in his drama Laocoon represents Aeneas, 
just before the taking of the city, as removing his 
household to Mount Ida in obedience to the orders 
of his father Anchises, who recalled the injunctions 
of Aphrodité and from the omens that had lately 
happened in the case of Laocoén’s family conjectured 
the approaching destruction of the city. His 
iambics, which are spoken by a messenger, are as 
follows : 


* Now at the gates arrives the goddess’ son, 
Aeneas, his sire upon his shoulders borne 
Aloft, while down that back by thunderbolt 
Of Zeus once smit the linen mantle streams ;” 
Surrounding them the crowd of household slaves. 


(“‘ bedewing the robe down his back’’) and adds the 
explanation that the body of Anchises gave off a foul exu- 
dation. Whether he had any evidence before him, other 
than this passage of Sophocles, we can only conjecture. 
We are told that Anchises was struck, or grazed, by 
lightning because he foolishly boasted of his intimacy with 
Aphrodité. There were various stories concerning the 
permanent disability suffered by him in consequence, but 
the early tradition represented him as lamed. 

155 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


συμπλάζεται δὲ πλῆθος οὐχ ὅσον δοκεῖς, 
ot! τῆσδ᾽ ἐρῶσι τῆς ἀποικίας Φρυγῶν. 


3 Μενεκράτης δὲ ὁ Ξάνθιος προδοῦναι τοῖς Αχαιοῖς 

“ΔΑ > ᾿ \ / ~ \ ? / 

αὐτὸν ἀποφαίνει τὴν πόλιν τῆς πρὸς ᾿Αλέξανδρον 

ἔχθρας ἕνεκα, καὶ διὰ τὴν εὐεργεσίαν ταύτην 

Ἀχαιοὺς αὐτῷ συγχωρῆσαι διασώσασθαι τὸν οἶκον. 
/ ὃ \ > ~ ς A ‘ > ‘ > > 2 "A 

σύγκειται δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ λόγος ἀρξαμένῳ ἀπ χιλ- 
΄ ΄ \ ‘ / cei? \ > 32 Zt 

λέως ταφῆς τὸν τρόπον τόνδε. ‘‘ Ayaods δ᾽ avin 

εἶχε καὶ ἐδόκεον τῆς στρατιῆς τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀπ- 

ηράχθαι. ὅμως δὲ τάφον αὐτῷ δαίσαντες ἐπολέμεον 
/ 3 / »” ” Tr <A At ‘ > ΄ 

βίῃ" πάσῃ, ἄχρις tos ἑάλω Αἰνείεω ἐνδόντος. 
5 ‘ A »” yal. ε \ > / ‘ > A 

Aiveins yap ἄτιτος ἐὼν ὑπὸ AdeEdvdpov καὶ ἀπὸ 

΄ ΄ > 
γερέων ? ἐξειργόμενος ἀνέτρεψε [Πρίαμον ἐργασά- 
O 2 e mgt ͵ 7} 

4 μενος δὲ ταῦτα εἷς ᾿Αχαιῶν ἐγεγόνει.᾽᾿ ἄλλοι δέ τινες 
ἐπὶ τοῦ ναυστάθμου τοῦ Τρωικοῦ τυχεῖν αὐτὸν τηνι- 
καῦτα διατρίβοντα λέγουσιν, οἱ δ᾽ εἰς Φρυγίαν ἀπ- 
εσταλμένον ὑπὸ Πριάμου μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐπί τινα 

> > lol 
χρείαν στρατιωτικήν εἰσὶ δ᾽ ot μυθωδεστέραν αὐτοῦ 
- ἝΝ Ἵ > uj 
ποιοῦσι τὴν ἔξοδον ἐχέτω δ᾽ ὅπῃ τις αὑτὸν πείθει. 
XLIX. Τὰ δὲ μετὰ τὴν ἔξοδον ἔτι πλείω παρέχει 
- - 7 c 
τοῖς πολλοῖς τὴν ἀπορίαν. οἱ μὲν yap ἕως Θράκης 
ἀγαγόντες αὐτὸν ἐκεῖ λέγουσι τελευτῆσαι τὸν βίον, 
= ς ‘ « 
ὧν ἐστι Κεφάλων τε ὁ [1 ἐργίθιος καὶ ᾿Ηγήσιππος 
1 δοκεῖς, οἱ Reiske: δοκεῖ σοὶ Ο. 
* ἀπὸ O: ἀπὸ τῆς Reiske, Jacoby. 
ὃ Bin Schaller, τῇ Reiske: γῆ AB. 
4 ἱερῶν deleted after γερέων by Kiessling. 





1 Nauck, 7’.G.f.*, p. 212, irg. 344. 
¢Menecrates (fourth century 7), a Lycian, wrote the 
history of his own country. 


156 


BOOK TI. 48, 2-49, 1 


There follows a multitude beyond belief 
Who long to join this Phrygian colony.” ὦ 


But Menecrates of Xanthus® says that Aeneas be- 
trayed the city to the Achaeans out of hatred for 
Alexander and that because of this service he was 
permitted by them to save his household. His 
account, which begins with the funeral of Achilles, 
runs on this wise: ‘* The Achaeans were oppressed 
with grief and felt that the army had had its head 
lopped off. However, they celebrated his funeral 
feast and made war with all their might till [lium 
was taken by the aid of Aeneas, who delivered it up 
to them. For Aeneas, being scorned by Alexander 
and excluded from his prerogatives, overthrew 
Priam; and having accomplished this, he became 
one of the Achaeans.” Others say that he chanced 
to be tarrying at that time at the station where the 
Trojan ships lay; and others that he had been sent 
with a force into Phrygia by Priam upon some mili- 
tary expedition. Some give a more fabulous account 
of his departure. But let the case stand according 
to each man’s convictions. 

XLIX. What happened after his departure creates 
still greater difficulty for most historians. For some, 
after they have brought him as far as Thrace, say 
he died there; of this number are Cephalon of 
Gergis? and Hegesippus,? who wrote concerning 


8 A fictitious author under whose name Hegesianax of 
Alexandria in the Troad published some of his own works, 
especially his Troica (Athenaeus ix. 393d). Dionysius 
cites him again in chap. 72, 1. 

4 Hegesippus of Mecyberna in Chalcidicé probably lived 
in the fourth or third century. 

157 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ς \ / 4 > - 
61 περὶ LladAjvns γράψας, ἄνδρες ἀρχαῖοι καὶ 
λόγου ἄξιοι. ἕτεροι δὲ ἐκ Θράκης ἀναστήσαντες 
| A oa "A δί / >] ~ δὲ 
αὐτὸν ἕως ApKadias παρακομίζουσιν, οἰκῆσαι δὲ 
λέγουσιν ἐν ᾿Οργομενῶ τε τῶ A δικῶ ἱ 
y ρχομενῷ τε τῷ ApxaduK@, καὶ 
Ν ὔ ὃ A 2 A / / 3 »” ’ὔ 
now δὲ εγομένῃ, καίπερ οὔσῃ μεσόχθονι, 
ἀπὸ τελμάτων καὶ ποταμοῦ: τάς τε καλουμένας 
4 > / \ 4 5 / Ξ 
Καπύας Αἰνείου τε καὶ Τρώων ἀπόκτισιν εἶναι, 
K / 5 > A / > A τι T, ~ Ka 
απύας ὃ ὀνομασθείσας amc τοῦ Τρωικοῦ Κάπυος. 
λέγεται δὲ ταῦτα ἄλλοις τε καὶ Apiailw τῷ 
α ~ 
γράψαντι τὰ Apkadixd. εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ ot δεῦρο μὲν 
5 ͵7 A > / ~ » ,ὔ 7 
ἀφικέσθαι τὸν Αἰνείαν μυθολογοῦσιν, οὐ μέντοι τήν 
γε τελευτὴν αὐτῷ τοῦ βίου συμπεσεῖν ἐν τοῖσδε 
τοῖς χωρίοις, ἀλλ ᾿ ἐν ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ, ὡς ἄλλοι τε πολλοὶ 
a > Af ales 
δηλοῦσι καὶ ᾿Ἀγάθυλλος Apkas ὁ ποιητὴς ἐν ἐλεγείῳ 
λέγων ὧδε" 


ἵκετο δ᾽ Apxadinv, Νήσῳ δ᾽ ἐγκάτθετο παῖδας 
δοιάς, Κωδώνης λέκτρα καὶ ᾿Ανθεμόνης. 
Ee. 5. ¢ , ” θ , ͵ δ᾽ e 
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ᾿Εσπερίην ἔσυτο χθόνα, γείνατο δ᾽ via 
“Ῥωμύλον. 
Τῆς δ᾽ εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν Αἰνείου καὶ Τρώων ἀφίξεως 
“Ῥωμαῖοί τε πάντες βεβαιωταὶ καὶ τὰ δρώμενα ὑπ᾽ 
1 6 added by Kiessling. 
2 καὶ νήσω δὲ A: καὶ νήσω B; καὶ omitted by Sauppe. 
3 καίπερ Steph.: καὶ O. 
4 Biicheler, Meineke: ὑπὸ O. 


δ Kadvas Sylburg. 
6 τῷ added by Kiessling. 


158 


BOOK T. 49, 1-3 


Pallené, both of them ancient and reputable men. 
Others make him leave Thrace and take him to 
Arcadia, and say that he lived in the Arcadian 
Orchomenus, in a place which, though situated in- 
land, yet by reason of marshes and a river, is called 
Nesos or “ Island” ;! and they add that the town 
called Capyae ? was built by Aeneas and the Trojans 
and took its name from Capys the Trojan. This is 
the account given by various other writers and by 
Ariaethus, the author of Arcadica.* And there are 
some who have the story that he came, indeed, to 
Arcadia and yet that his death did not occur there, 
but in Italy; this is stated by many others and 
especially by Agathyllus of Arcadia, the poet, who 


writes thus in an elegy: 


** Then to Arcadia came and in Nesos left his two 
daughters, 
Fruit of his love for Anthemoné fair and for 
lovely Codone ; 
Thence made haste to Hesperia’s land and begat 
there male offspring, 
Romulus named.” 


The arrival of Aeneas and the Trojans in Italy is 
attested by all the Romans and evidences of it are 
to be seen in the ceremonies observed by them both 


1The city of Orchomenus, built on a hill between two 
plains, one of which was often a lake, and with a deep 
gorge on a third side, may perhaps answer this description. 
Or Nesos may have been in the northern plain (to-day a 
Jake) near Caphyae. 

* More correctly Caphyae (Pausan. viii. 23, 2). 

* A history of Arcadia. We know nothing more about 
Ariaethus (Araethus ?) and Agathyllus than is told here. 


159 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


9 ~ 3 , A. € - / / 
αὐτῶν ἔν τε θυσίαις καὶ ἑορταῖς μηνύματα, Σιβύλλης 
τε λόγια καὶ χρησμοὶ [ἰ]υθικοὶ καὶ ἄλλα πολλά, 
ὧν οὐκ ἄν τις ὡς εὐπρεπείας ἕνεκα συγκειμένων 
e / \ \ \ 3 ὦ , 
ὑπερίδοι. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ παρ᾽ “ἔλλησι γνωρίσματα 
καὶ φανερὰ εἰς τόδε χρόνου περιλείπεται, ἔνθα 

7 > e 
ὡρμίσαντο καὶ map οἷς διατριβὴν ἀπλοίας ἕνεκεν 


> / e sarah / € a er > 
εποισαντο᾽ ὧν eyw μνῆμην ws av οἱος TE ὦ 


πολλῶν ὄντων βραχυτάτην ποιήσομαι. πρῶτον 
μὲν εἰς Θράκην ἀφικόμενοι κατὰ τὴν χερρόνησον, 
“a A / ς ͵ > \ 2 \ 
ἣ καλεῖται [ladAjvn, ὡρμίσαντο. εἶχον δὲ αὐτὴν 
σ a / a / \ 
ὥσπερ ἔφην βάρβαροι Kpovoator καλούμενοι Kat 
παρέσχον αὐτοῖς τὰς καταγωγὰς ἀσφαλεῖς. μείναν- 
Q \ \ \ if > / \ > ‘ 
τες δὲ THY χειμερινὴν ὥραν αὐτόθι νεὼν Adpoditns 
ἱδρύσαντο ἐπὶ τῶν ἀκρωτηρίων ἑνὸς καὶ πόλιν 


1 Τῇ the “ digression,’ as Dionysius calls it (chap. 53, 4), 
which begins at this point, he gives a confident, straight- 
forward account of the wanderings of Aeneas from Troy to 
Lavinium, without once naming a source or hinting at 
any variations in the legend. Kiessling (De Dionysi Hal. 
Antiquitatum auctoribus Latinis, p. 40) argued that he was 
here following Varro as his authority, as he does silently in 
various other places, and many scholars have accepted 
his conclusions; but unfortunately, for our knowledge of 
Varro’s account, we have to depend on a few scattered 
quotations, found chiefly in Servius’ commentary on the 
Aeneid. The route of Aeneas as traced by Virgi! agrees 
so closely for the most part with that given by Dionysius 
as to suggest that both authors were drawing largely on 
the same source. The differences in their accounts can 
easily be explained when we bear in mind that one was a 
historian who prided himself on his chronological studies 
(chap. 74, 2) and the other a poet who gave free rein to 
his imagination. Thus, Dionysius was bound to reject the 
visit of Aeneas to Carthage if, as seems probable, he 


160 


BOOK I. 49, 3-4 


in their sacrifices and festivals, as well as in the 
Sibyl’s utterances. in the Pythian oracles, and in 
many other things, which none ought to disdain 
as invented for the sake of embellishment. Among 
the Greeks, also, many distinct monuments remain 
to this day on the coasts where they landed and 
among the people with whom they tarried when 
detained by unfavourable weather. In mentioning 
these, though they are numerous, I shall be as brief 
as possible.t They first went to Thrace and landed 
on the peninsula called Pallené. It was inhabited, as 
I have said,? by barbarians called Crusaeans, who 
offered them a safe refuge. There they stayed the 
winter season and built a temple to Aphrodité on one 
of the promontories, and also a city called Aeneia, 


accepted Timazeus’ date for the founding of that city 
(813; see chap. 74, 1). Chronological considerations may 
also account in part for Dionysius’ silence concerning 
Cumae and Crete, though the Cumaean episode is evidently 
a late addition to the legend, perhaps due to Virgil himself ; 
we shall see (chap. 55, 4) that Dionysius connected another 
Sibyl, living in the neighbourhood of Mt. Ida, with the 
destiny of the Trojan exiles, and this is doubtless the 
original form of the legend. One very important difference 
between the stories of Dionysius and Virgil is seen in the 
length of time assigned to the voyage from Troy to 
Lavinium ; the historian allows just two years, the poet 
seven. For brief discussions of the growth of the Aeneas 
legend see Glover, Vergil, chap. iv.; Nettleship, Virgil, 
pp. 47-50; Prescott, Development of Virgil’s Art, pp. 153- 
168. A detailed comparison of the accounts of Dionysius 
and Virgil may be found in Worner, Die Sage von den 
Wanderungen des Aeneas bei Dionysios und Vergilius, and 
also in his article on Aineias in Roscher’s Lexikon der 
griech. und rém. Mythologie, i. pp. 165-78. 
2 Chap. 47, end. 


161 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


At ” > Φ "A e A ᾽ὔ > ’ὔ 
ἴνειαν ἔκτισαν, ἐν 7) τούς τε ὑπὸ καμάτων ἀδυνά- 
tous πλεῖν καὶ ὅσοις αὐτοῦ μένειν βουλομένοις ἦν, 
ὡς ἐν οἰκείᾳ γῇ τὸ λοιπὸν ἐσομένους, ὑπελίποντο. 
αὕτη διέμεινεν ἕως τῆς Μακεδόνων δυναστείας τῆς 
A \ » \ > / ͵ὔ 
κατὰ τοὺς διαδόχους τοὺς AdcEdvdpov γενομένης" 
ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς Κασάνδρου βασιλείας καθῃρέθη, ὅτε 
Θ / / > / \ c κε ~ \ 
εσσαλονίκη πόλις ἐκτίζετο, καὶ ot Αἰνεᾶται σὺν 
ἄλλοις πολλοῖς εἰς τὴν νεόκτιστον μετῴκησαν. 
L. Ἔκ δὲ τῆς Παλλήνης ἄραντες of Τρῶες εἰς 
~ 5 ~ / . ~ > , \ 
Ζ4ῆλον ἀφικνοῦνται βασιλεύοντος αὐτῆς Aviov: Kat 
> AA \ ~ > A / ~ > / \ 
ἦν πολλὰ σημεῖα ἐν Δήλῳ τῆς Αἰνείου τε Kal 
Τρώων παρουσίας, ews! ἤνθει τε καὶ φκεῖτοΞ ἡ 
νῆσος. ἔπειτα εἰς Κύθηρα νῆσον ἑτέραν, ἣ πρό- 
κειται Π]ελοποννήσου, παραγενόμενοι ἱερὸν “Adpo- 
δίτης ἱδρύονται. ἀπὸ δὲ Κυθήρων ποιούμενοι τὸν 
πλοῦν οὐ πρόσω τῆς “Πελοποννήσου τελευτήσαντα 
τῶν ἑταίρων τινὰ τῶν Αἰνείου Κίναιθον ἐπὶ τῶν 
~ > 
ἀκρωτηρίων τινὸς θάπτουσιν, ὃ viv am ἐκείνου 
/ - \ \ \ 3 / 
Κιναίθιον καλεῖται. Kai τὴν πρὸς Apkddas ovy- 
γένειαν ἀνανεωσάμενοι, περὶ ἧς ἐν ὑστέρῳ λόγῳ 
\ ~ 
διηγήσομαι, χρόνον τε ὀλίγον περὶ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία 
διατρίψαντες καὶ ὑπολιπόμενοί τινας σφῶν αὐτῶν 
> OA / > ~ ὃ / δ᾽ ᾽ \ 
εἰς Ζάκυνθον ἀφικνοῦνται. δεξαμένων αὐτοὺς 
\ ~ / \ / \ \ / 
καὶ τῶν Ζακυνθίων πρὸς φιλίαν διὰ τὸ συγγενές 
/ A ~ ‘\ in Ὁ ΄ ~ > 
(Δαρδάνῳ yap τῷ Atos καὶ ᾿Ηλέκτρας τῆς AtAav- 
" ΄ 7 \ > ΄, a 
τίδος δύο γενέσθαι φασὶν ἐκ Βατείας παῖδας, 
/ / \ > , e c \ > / 
Ζάκυνθόν te καὶ ᾿Εριχθόνιον, dv ὁ μὲν Αἰνείου 


1 ἕως added by Sylburg. 
2Madvig: ὠκίσθη AB; ᾧκήθη Reiske, ᾧκισθ᾽ Jacoby. 


162 


BOOK I. 49, 4-50, 3 


where they left all those who from fatigue were 
unable to continue the voyage and all who chose to 
remain there as in a country they were henceforth 
to look upon as their own. This city existed down 
to that period of the Macedonian rule which came 
into being under the successors of Alexander, but 
it was destroyed in the reign of Cassander, when 
Thessalonica was being founded; and the in- 
habitants of Aeneia with many others removed to 
the newly-built city. 

L. Setting sail from Pallené, the Trojans came to 
Delos, of which Anius was king. Here there were 
many evidences of the presence of Aeneas and the 
Trojans as long as the island was inhabited and 
flourished. Then. coming to Cythera, another island, 
lying off the Peloponnesus. they built a temple there 
to Aphrodité. And while they were on their voy- 
age from Cythera and not far from the Pelopon- 
nesus, one of Aeneas’ companions, named Cinaethus, 
died and they buried him upon one of the promon- 
tories, which is now called Cinaethion after him. 
And having renewed their kinship with the Arcadians, 
concerning which 1 shall speak in a later chapter,? 
and having stayed a short time in those parts, they 
left some of their number there and came to 
Zacynthus. The Zacynthians. also, received them 
in a friendly manner on account of their kinship ; 
for Dardanus, the son of Zeus and Electra, the 
daughter of Atlas. had. as they say. by Bateia two 
sons, Zacynthus and Erichthonius of whom the 


1 But Aeneia is mentioned by Livy (xliv. 10, 7) as still 


in existence at a later time, 
2 Chap. 61. 


163 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ = / \ ~ / , 
πρόγονος ἦν, Ζάκυνθος δὲ τῆς νήσου κτίστης), 
ταύτης τε δὴ τῆς συγγενείας ἀναμνήσει καὶ φιλο- 
φροσύνῃ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων διατρίβοντες αὐτόθι καὶ 
7 > / / "A > / κ᾿ 
ἅμα ἀπλοίᾳ κατειργόμενοι θύουσιν ‘Adpoditn πρὸς 
τῷ κατασκευασθέντι ἱερῷ θυσίαν, ἣν εἰς τόδε 
χρόνου συντελοῦσι κοινῇ Ζακύνθιοι, καὶ ἀγῶνα 
ποιοῦσιν ἐφήβοις τῶν τε ἄλλων ἀγωνισμάτων καὶ 
δρόμου: τὸ δὲ νικητήριον ὁ πρῶτος ἐλθὼν εἰς τὸν 
νεὼν λαμβάνει: λέγεται δὲ Αἰνείου καὶ ‘Adpoditys 
ὁ δρόμος, καὶ ξόανα τούτων ἕστηκεν ἀμφοτέρων. 
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ πελάγιον ποιησάμενοι τὸν πλοῦν εἰς 
Λευκάδα κατάγονται, κατεχόντων ἔτι τὸ χωρίον 
> / > / / « A > / 
Ἀκαρνάνων. κἀν ταύτῃ πάλιν ἱερὸν Adpodirns 

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Ἁ 
ἱδρύονται τοῦτο, ὃ νῦν ἐστιν ἐν τῇ νησῖδι τῇ μεταξὺ 
τοῦ Διορύκτου τε καὶ τῆς πόλεως, καλεῖται δὲ 

»Ψ \ > 7s 208 
Adpoditns Αἰνειάδος. ἄραντες δὲ αὐτόθεν ἐπί 
τε Ἄκτιον ἐλθόντες ὁρμίζονται τοῦ Ἀμβρακικοῦ 
κόλπου πρὸς τὸ ἀκρωτήριον. κἀκεῖθεν εἰς Ap- 
βρακίαν ἀφικνοῦνται πόλιν, ἧς ἐβασίλευεν “AuBpagé 
ς ~ a ¢ / \ ς / 
ὁ Δεξαμενοῦ τοῦ ᾿ Πρακλέους, καὶ ὑπολείπονται 
« ΄ ~ ~ > / > > / A 
ἑκατέρωθι μνημεῖα τῆς ἀφίξεως. ἐν Axtiw μὲν 
> / A 42 ς \ \ λ / > ~ θ ~ 
Adpodirns Aiverddos ἱερὸν καὶ πλησίον αὐτοῦ θεῶν 





1 Dioryctus (literally, a place “ dug through ᾽᾽) usually 
means the canal which made Leucas an island. But as 
Oberhummer has pointed out (Akarnanien, ... Leukas im 
Altertum, p. 10, n. 1) the only place for the little island 
here named would seem to have been in the canal; hence 
Dioryctus was evidently the name also of a place on the 
canal, probably on the Acarnanian side, at the end of the 
bridge mentioned by Strabo (x. 2, 8). 


164 


BOOK T. 50, 3-4 


latter was the ancestor of Aeneas, and Zacynthus 
was the first settler of the island. In memory, 
therefore, of this kinship and by reason of the 
kindness of the inhabitants they stayed there some 
time, being also detained by unfavourable weather ; 
and they offered to Aphrodité at the temple they 
had built to her a sacrifice which the entire popula- 
tion of Zacynthus performs to this day, and insti- 
tuted games for young men, consisting among other 
events of a foot-race in which the one who comes 
first to the temple gains the prize. This is called the 
course of Aeneas and Aphrodité, and wooden statues 
of both are erected there. From there, after a 
voyage through the open sea, they landed at Leucas, 
which was still in the possession of the Acarnanians. 
Here again they built a temple to Aphrodité, which 
stands to-day on the little island between Dioryctus ! 
and the city; it is called the temple of Aphrodité 
Aeneias.”, And departing thence, they sailed to 
Actium and anchored off the promontory of the 
Ambracian Gulf; and from there they came to the 
city of Ambracia, which was then ruled by Ambrax, 
the son of Dexamenus, the son of Herakles. Monu- 
ments of their coming are left in both places: at 
Actium, the temple of Aphrodité Aeneias, and near 
to it that of the Great Gods, both of which existed 


? Thiscult-title of Aphrodité has been variously explained. 
See Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, ii. 638 ff., and Rossbach 
in Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Enc.,s.v. Aineias, pp. 1018f. Malten, 
the latest to discuss the problem (Archiv fiir Religionswissen- 
schaft, xxix. (1931), pp. 33-59), regards this goddess as the 
mother of the race of the Aeneadae, and identifies her with 
the Mater Idaea, a variant form of the Great Mother; she 
is not to be confused with the Phoenician Astarté. 


165 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μεγάλων, ἃ καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ Fv: ἐν δὲ Ἀμβρακίᾳ ἱερόν 
τε τῆς αὐτῆς θεοῦ καὶ ἡρῷον Αἰνείου πλησίον τοῦ 
μικροῦ θεάτρου, ἐν ᾧ καὶ ξόανον μικρὸν ἀρχαϊκὸν 
Αἰνείου λεγόμενον, καὶ αὐτὸ θυσίαις ἐγέραιρον αἱ 
καλούμεναι παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἀμφίπολοι. 

LI. Ἔκ δὲ Ἀμβρακίας ᾿Αγχίσης μὲν τὰς ναῦς 
ἔχων παρὰ γῆν κομιζόμενος εἰς Βουθρωτὸν λιμένα 
τῆς Ππείρου κατάγεται, Αἰνείας δὲ καὶ οἱ ἀκμαιό- 
τατοι σὺν αὐτῷ τοῦ στρατοῦ διανύσαντες ἡμερῶν 
δυεῖν ὁδὸν εἰς Δωδώνην ἀφικνοῦνται χρησόμενοι 
τῷ θεῷ καὶ καταλαμβάνουσιν αὐτόθι Τρῶας τοὺς 
σὺν ᾿Ελένῳ. ἀνελόμενοι δὲ χρησμοὺς περὶ τῆς 
ἀποικίας καὶ τὸν θεὸν ἀναθήμασι δωρησάμενοι 
Τρωικοῖς ἄλλοις τε καὶ κρατῆρσι χαλκοῖς, ὧν 
τινες ἔτι περίεισιν ἐπιγραφαῖς πάνυ ἀρχαίαις δη- 
λοῦντες τοὺς ἀναθέντας, ἐπὶ τὸ ναυτικὸν ἀφικ- 
νοῦνται τεττάρων μάλιστα ἡμερῶν διελθόντες ὁδόν. 
δηλοῖ δὲ καὶ τὴν εἰς Βουθρωτὸν τῶν Τρώων 
παρουσίαν λόφος τις, ᾧ τότε" στρατοπέδῳ ἐχρή- 
σαντο, Τροία καλούμενος. ἐκ δὲ Βουθρωτοῦ παρὰ 
γῆν κομισθέντες ἄχρι λιμένος Ἀγχίσου μὲν τότε 
ὀνομασθέντος, νῦν δ᾽ ἀσαφεστέραν ἔχοντος ὀνομα- 
σίαν, ἱερὸν καὶ αὐτόθι τῆς Adpoditns ἱδρυσάμενοι 
διαίρουσι τὸν ᾿Ϊόνιον ἡγεμόνας ἔχοντες τῆς vavTi- 
λίας,3 ot συνέπλευσαν αὐτοῖς ἐθελούσιοι συνεπι- 


/ 4 \ \ FF / ~ Θ ΄ 5 ἃ ‘ 
σπόμενοι,, τοὺς σὺν Llatpwr τῷ Oovpiw?: Kat 
1 δηλοῖ. . . καλούμενος B: om. R. 2. Kiessling: ποτὲ B. 


8’ Axapvavas added after ναυτιλίας by Kiessling. 
*Reiske: συνεπισπώμενοι O, Kiessling. 
5 Θυρίῳ Meineke. 


166 


BOOK IT. 50, 4-51, 2 


even to my time; and in Ambracia, a temple of 
the same goddess and a hero-shrine of Aeneas near 
the little theatre. In this shrine there was a small 
archaic statue of wood, said to be of Aeneas, that 
was honoured with sacrifices by the priestesses they 
called amphipoloi or “ handmaidens.” 

LI. From Ambracia Anchises, sailing with the 
fleet along the coast, came to Buthrotum, a seaport 
of Epirus. But Aeneas with the most vigorous men 
of his army made a march of two days and came to 
Dodona, in order to consult the oracle; and there 
they found the Trojans who had come thither with 
Helenus. Then, after receiving responses concerning 
their colony and after dedicating to the god various 
Trojan offerings, including bronze mixing bowls,— 
some of which are still in existence and by their 
inscriptions, which are very ancient, show by whom 
they were given,—they rejoined the fleet after a 
march of about four days. The presence of the 
Trojans at Buthrotum is proved by a hill called 
Troy, where they encamped at that time. From 
Buthrotum they sailed along the coast and came 
to a place which was then called the Harbour of 
Anchises but now has a less significant name ;} 
there also they built a temple to Aphrodité, and 
then crossed the Ionian Gulf, having for guides on 
the voyage Patron the Thyrian? and his men, who 


1 Onchesmus, opposite the northern point of Corcyra. 

2 Θούριος generally means a man from Thurii in Italy. 
But Androtion is cited by Stephanus of Byzantium as 
using it for Θυριεύς, a man of Thyrium (or Thyreum) 
in Acarnania. Virgil (Aen. v. 298) names Patron, an 
Acarnanian, as one of the contestants in the funeral 
games in honour of Anchises. 

167 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


αὐτῶν οἱ μὲν πλείους, ἐπειδὴ σῶος ὁ στρατὸς εἰς 
> ͵ as > > ” > > ͵ 
Iradiav ἀφίκετο, ἐπ᾽ οἴκου αὖθις ἀνεκομίσθησαν, 
Πάτρων δὲ πεισθεὶς ὑπ᾽ Αἰνείου κοινωνεῖν τῆς 
ἀποικίας καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ τινες τῶν φίλων ὑπέμειναν 
> ~ / 1 Δ » , > > / 
ἐν τῷ στόλῳ". ots ἔνιοί φασιν ev AdovTi 
κατοικῆσαι τῆς Σικελίας. ταύτης ὑπομνήσει τῆς 
Ε] ΄ > ~ Ῥ - A / . 2 
εὐεργεσίας ᾿Ακαρνᾶσι “Ῥωμαῖοι Λευκάδα καὶ Ava- 
κτόριον ἀφελόμενοι Κορινθίους ἀνὰ χρόνον ἐχαρί- 
σαντο Οἰνιάδας τε ἀποκαταστῆσαι βουλομένοις 
> ° ~ 
ἐπέτρεψαν καὶ τὰς ᾿Εχινάδας νήσους καρποῦσθαι 
~ > ? ~ ” ς \ \ > ΄, 
κοινῇ pet Αἰτωλῶν ἔδωκαν. οἱ δὲ σὺν Αἰνείᾳ 
Δ ~ 
ποιησάμενοι THY ἀπόβασιν od καθ᾽ ἕν χωρίον τῆς 
> ,ὔ 3 \ ~ \ ΄ \ A 
TIraXias, ἀλλὰ ταῖς μὲν πλείσταις ναυσὶ πρὸς 
ἄκραν ᾿ΪΙαπυγίας ὁρμισάμενοι, ἣ τότε Ladevtivos 
ᾺἋ 2 - ον A \ \ / > / 
ἐλέγετο, ταῖς δὲ λοιπαῖς κατὰ τὸ καλούμενον ᾿4θή- 
> 
ναιον, ἔνθα καὶ αὐτὸς Αἰνείας ἐτύγχανεν ἐπιβὰς 
᾿Ιταλίας (τοῦτο δὲ τὸ χωρίον ἐστὶν ἀκρωτήριον καὶ 
ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ θερινὸς ὅρμος, ὃς ἐξ ἐκείνου λιμὴν Adpo- 
αὐτῷ θερινὸς ὅρμος, ὃς ἐξ μὴν Adpo 
δίτης καλεῖται), παρέπλευσαν ἄχρι πορθμοῦ ἐκ δεξιᾶς 


1 ἐν τῷ στόλῳ Steph., ἐν τῷ πλῷ Madvig, ἐν τῇ Σικελίᾳ 
Kiessling: ἐν τῶ σίλω ΑΒ. 





1 Kiessling, rejecting this interpretation, supplied the 
word ‘‘ Acarnanians’’ and retained the MS. reading 
συνεπισπώμενοι, the meaning then being: “having for 
guides . . . some Acarnanians who accompanied them of 
their own accord, bringing along with them Patron the 
Thyrian and his men.” 

2In 196 B.c. these two cities were apparently recognized 
by Rome as belonging to the Acarnanian League. The 
statement that the Romans had taken them from the 
Corinthians is utterly erroneous; the cities had been 
founded by the Corinthians, but had tong been in the 
hands of the Acarnanians. 


168 


BOOK I. 51, 2-3 


accompanied them of their own accord.! The greater 
part of these, after the army had arrived safely in 
Italy, returned home; but Patron with some of 
his friends, being prevailed on by Aeneas to join the 
colony, stayed with the expedition. These, accord- 
ing to some, settled at Aluntium in Sicily. In 
memory of this service the Romans in the course 
of time bestowed Leucas and Anactorium, which 
they had taken from the Corinthians, upon the 
Acarnanians;* and when the latter desired to 
restore the Oeniadae to their old home,’ they gave 
them leave to do so, and also to enjoy the produce 
of the Echinades jointly with the Aetolians.4 As 
for Aeneas and his companions, they did not all go 
ashore at the same place in Italy, but most of the 
ships came to anchor at the Promontory of lapygia, 
which was then called the Salentine Promontory, and 
the others at a place named after Minerva,° where 
Aeneas himself chanced to set foot first in Italy. 
This place is a promontory that offers a harbour in 
the summer, which from that time has been called 
the Harbour of Venus.* After this they sailed along 


3 Or, “‘ restore Oeniadae to its old status.’’ Oeniadae 
was the name of both town and people. Our only other 
sources for this incident (Livy xxxviii. 11, 9; Polybius 
xxi. 32, 14) merely state that in the peace terms between 
Rome and the Aetolians in 189 it was provided that the 
city and territory of Oeniadae should belong to the 
Acarnanians. 

*We have no further information concerning this 
arrangement with regard to the Echinades. Oberhummer 
(op. cit., p. 186, n. 4) suggests that these islands must have 
been divided up between the Aetolians and Acarnanians. 

®*Castrum Minervae. The temple on this promontory 
was a well-known landmark. ® Portus Veneris. 


169 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


A 1 »” ia αλί Υ, A > / e 
χειρὸς ' ἔχοντες ᾿Ϊταλίαν, ἴχνη τινὰ κἀν τούτοις bz0- 
/ ~ / ~ > U ΝΜ A 
λειπόμενοι τοῖς τόποις τῆς ἀφίξεως ἄλλα τε Kal 
/ ~ Dra 46 « ~ > ~ ~ 
φιάλην χαλκῆν ev “Hpas ἱερῷ ἐπιγραφῇ δηλοῦσαν 
ἀρχαίᾳ " τοῦ δωρησαμένου τῇ θεῷ Αἰνείου τοὔνομα. 
LIT. Γενόμενοι δὲ κατὰ Σικελίαν, εἴτε γνώμῃ 
~ > 
χρησάμενοι τῇδε ὁρμίσασθαι εἴτε Kal ὑπ᾽ ἀνέμων 
~ / Δ \ ~ ‘ A 4 
πονηρῶν βιασθέντες, ἃ δὴ φιλεῖ περὶ τὴν θάλατταν 
τήνδε γίνεσθαι, κατάγονται τῆς νήσου περὶ τὰ 
καλούμενα δρέπανα" ἔνθα περιτυγχάνουσι τοῖς σὺν 
᾿Ελύμῳ καὶ Αἰγέστῳ προεξελθοῦσιν ἐκ τῆς Τροίας, 
οἵ τύχης τε καὶ πνεύματος οὐρίου λαβόμενοι καὶ 
“ ᾽ ~ > ~ / > Iya ἡ 
ἅμα ov πολλῇ ἀποσκευῇ βαρυνόμενοι δι᾽ ὀλίγου 
κατήχθησαν εἰς Σικελίαν καὶ ῴᾧκησαν περὶ ποταμὸν 
\ > ~ ~ \ / 
καλούμενον Κριμισὸν ἐν γῇ Lixava@v, πρὸς φιλίαν 
> ~ \ 
λαβόντες παρ᾽ αὐτῶν τὸ χωρίον διὰ τὴν Αἰγέστου 
> 
συγγένειαν γενομένου Te καὶ τραφέντος ev Σικελίᾳ 
κατὰ τοιόνδε τι πάθος. τῶν προγόνων αὐτοῦ τις 
> \ > \ > ~ ~ / Ἅ / 
ἀνὴρ ἐπιφανὴς ἐκ τοῦ Τρωικοῦ γένους ὧν Aaope- 
7 
δοντι διάφορος γίνεται, καὶ αὐτὸν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπ 
~ \ 
αἰτίᾳ δή τινι λαβὼν κτείνει καὶ γένος αὐτοῦ τὸ 
¢ ~ / 
ἄρρεν ἅπαν, ὑπὸ δέους μή τι πρὸς αὐτῶν man: 
τὰς δὲ θυγατέρας παρθένους ἔτι οὔσας ἀποκτεῖναι 
μὲν οὐκ εὐπρεπὲς ἐνόμισε, Τρωσὶ δὲ συνοικούσας 
~ ) > / 7 > > \ > / 
περιιδεῖν οὐκ ἀσφαλές, δίδωσι δ᾽ αὐτὰς ἐμπόροις 
/ > 4 
Ws προσωτάτω κελεύσας ἀπάγειν. ταύταις ἀπιού- 
A - > ~ / 
Gals συνεκπλεῖ μειράκιόν τι τῶν ἐπιφανῶν κρατού- 
~ ε ~ \ / 
μενον ἔρωτι THs ἑτέρας Kal γαμεῖ τὴν παιδίσκην 


1 ἐκ δεξιᾶς χειρὸς Hertlein: διὰ χειρὸς O, Jacoby. 
2 ἐπιγραφῇ ὃ. ἀρχαίᾳ Kiessling, γραφῇ ὃ. ἀρχαίᾳ Steph.: 
γραφὴν ὃ. ἀρχαίαν ΑΒ. 


170 


BOOK I. 51. 3-52, 3 


the coast until they reached the strait, having Italy 
on the right hand, and left in these places also some 
traces of their arrival, among others a bronze patera 
in the temple of Juno, on which there is an ancient 
inscription showing the name of Aeneas as the one 
who dedicated it to the goddess. 

LIT. When they were off Sicily, whether they had 
any design of landing there or were forced from their 
course by tempests, which are common around this 
sea, they landed in that part of the island which is 
called Drepana. Here they found the Trojans who 
with Elymus and Aegestus had left Troy before 
them and who, being favoured by both fortune and 
the wind, and at the same time being not over- 
burdened with baggage, had made a quick passage 
to Sicily and were settled near the river Crimisus 
in the country of the Sicanians. For the latter had 
bestowed the land upon them out of friendship 
because of their kinship to Aegestus, who had been 
born and reared in Sicily owing to the following 
circumstance. One of his ancestors, a distinguished 
man of Trojan birth, became at odds with Laomedon 
and the king seized him on some charge or other and 
put him to death, together with all his male children, 
lest he should suffer some mischief at their hands. 
But thinking it unseemly to put the man’s daughters 
to death, as they were still maidens, and at the same 
time unsafe to permit them to live among the 
Trojans, he delivered them to some merchants, with 
orders to carry them as far away as possible. They 
were accompanied on the voyage by a youth of 
distinguished family, who was in love with one of 
them; and he married the girl when she arrived in 


171 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> A > / \ / > a ~ > 
ἀχθεῖσαν εἰς Σικελίαν, καὶ γίνεται αὐτοῖς παῖς ev 
~ / ” »Μ Δ » \ 
Σικελοῖς διατρίβουσιν Αἴγεστος ὄνομα: ὃς ἤθη καὶ 
γλῶσσαν τῶν ἐπιχωρίων ἐκμαθών, ἐπειδὴ τοὺς 
γονεῖς αὐτῷ τελευτῆσαι συνέβη, βασιλεύοντος ἐν 
τῇ / TT, / 10 ς ~ ~ ’ 
ροίᾳ ΠΠριάμου κάθοδον αὑτῷ δοθῆναι διαπράτ- 
τεται, καὶ συνδιενέγκας τὸν πρὸς τοὺς ᾿Αχαιοὺς 
/ ¢ / ~ / > / / > 
πόλεμον ἁλισκομένης τῆς πόλεως ἀπέπλει πάλιν εἰς 
Σικελίαν σὺν ᾿Ελύμῳ ποιησάμενος τὴν φυγὴν ἐν 
\ \ Δ > \ wv - Ἁ / 
τρισὶ ναυσὶν, as ᾿ἀχιλλεὺς ἔχων ὅτε tas Tpwddas 
> / / 4 e / / 
eAnilero πόλεις ἕρμασιν ὑφάλοις περιπεσούσας 
> / > \ \ A > / > / 
ἀπέβαλεν. ἐντυχὼν δὴ Tots εἰρημένοις Αἰνείας 
ἀνδράσι φιλοφρονεῖταί τε αὐτοὺς καὶ κατασκευά- 
᾽ - “λ Al \ "EX 1 / 
ζεται αὐτοῖς πόλεις Αἴγεσταν καὶ υμαῖ καί 
- ~ ¢ ~ “ a 
τινα Kal μοῖραν τῆς ἑαυτοῦ στρατιᾶς ἐν τοῖς 
΄ « / ε A > \ > / A 
πολίσμασιν ὑπολείπεται, ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ εἰκάζω, γνώμῃ 
ἑκουσίῳ χρησάμενος, ἵνα τοῖς ὑπὸ καμάτων βαρυνο- 
’ὔὕ Ἃ \ »Μ / > θ / > / 
μένοις ἢ καὶ ἄλλως θαλάττῃ ἀχθομένοις ἀναπαύσεις 
γίνοιντο ἀσφαλεῖς καὶ καταγωγαί, ὡς δέ τινες 
~ ~ ‘ ~ \ 
γράφουσι͵ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ μειωθέντος αὐτῷ διὰ τὴν 
Δ ~ ~ > 
ἔμπρησιν, ἣν ἐποιήσαντο τῶν γυναικῶν τινες ἀχθό- 
μεναι τῇ πλάνῃ, τὸν οὐκέτι δυνάμενον συμπλεῖν 
> ~ ~ > 
ὄχλον ἐκ τῶν κατακεκαυμένων νεῶν ἀνάγκῃ KaTa- 
λιπών. 


1 ἔλυμα R, ἐλύμαν Bb: Ἔρυκα Sylburg, Portus. 





1The incident here mentioned does not seem to be 
recorded by any other extant writer. The sacking of the 
Trojan cities was described in the lost Cypria. 

2 Called Segesta by the Romans. 

Some of the early editors proposed to read Eryx for 
Elyma here and for Elymus in the next chapter, but later 
editors have retained the readings of the MSS. Neither 


172 


BOOK I. 52, 3-4 


Sicily. And during their stay among the Sicels they 
had a son, named Aegestus, who learned the manners 
and language of the inhabitants; but after the 
death of his parents, Priam being then king of Troy, 
he obtained leave to return home. And having as- 
sisted Priam in the war against the Achaeans, he 
then, when the city was about to be taken, sailed 
back again to Sicily, being accompanied in his flight 
by Elymus with the three ships which Achilles had 
had with him when he plundered the Trojan cities 
and had Jost when they struck on some hidden rocks.! 
Aeneas, meeting with the men just named, showed 
them great kindness and built cities for them, 
Aegesta? and Elyma,’ and even left some part of 
his army in these towns. It is my own surmise that 
he did this by deliberate choice, to the end that 
those who were worn out by hardships or otherwise 
irked by the sea might enjoy rest and a safe retreat. 
But some writers say that the loss of part of his fleet, 
which was set on fire by some of the women, who 
were dissatisfied with their wandering, obliged him 
to leave behind the people who belonged to the burned 
ships and for that reason could sail no longer with 
their companions. 


Elyma nor Elymus is found anywhere else as the name of 
a city or mountain in Sicily, though Silius Italicus (Pun. 
xiv. 46 ff.) seems to state that both Acestes and Halymus 
(his names for the two Trojans) built cities named after 
themselves. There can be little doubt that Eryx, with 
the neighbouring mountain famous for its altar or temple 
of Aphrodité, was the place really meant; and it seems 
strange that Dionysius should have failed to make the 
identification, especially as he often gives both the earlier 
and later names of a place. 


173 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


LIT]. Τεκμήρια δὲ τῆς εἰς Σικελοὺς Αἰνείου τε 
καὶ Τρώων ἀφίξεως πολλὰ μὲν καὶ ἄλλα, περιφανέ- 
στατα δὲ τῆς Αἰνειάδος Adpodityns ὁ βωμὸς ἐπὶ τῇ 

~ ~ °EX / 1 ὃ 7 \ « A > ΄ if 
κορυφῇ τοῦ “EAvpou! ἱδρυμένος καὶ ἱερὸν Αἰνείου 
> ~ 
ἱδρυμένον ἐν Αἰγέστῃ, τὸν μὲν αὐτοῦ κατασκευά- 
/ ~ ~ 
σαντος Αἰνείου τῇ μητρί, τὸ δὲ ἱερὸν τῶν ὑπολει- 
» ~ ~ ~ 
φθέντων ἀπὸ τοῦ στόλου τῇ μνήμῃ τοῦ σώσαντος 
σφᾶς ἀνάθημα ποιησαμένων. τὸ μὲν δὴ σὺν 
> r / \ Ai / Ἶ, \ > / / 
Ελύμῳ καὶ Αἰγέστῳ Τρωικὸν ἐν τούτοις κατέμεινε 
~ / \ / »” ͵ὔ 
τοῖς χωρίοις, καὶ διετέλεσαν “EAvpor καλούμενοι" 
προεῖχεΣ γὰρ κατὰ τὴν ἀξίωσιν “EAvpos ἀπὸ τοῦ 
βασιλικοῦ γένους ὦν, ἀφ᾽ οὗ τὴν κλῆσιν οἱ σύμ- 
Μ ς \ A ~ >] / / > ‘ 
παντες ἔλαβον. of δὲ σὺν τῷ Αἰνείᾳ πλέοντες ἀπὸ 
Σικελίας διὰ τοῦ Τυρρηνικοῦ πελάγους πρῶτον μὲν 
ε ᾿ Ξθκεν " " \ , \ ͵ 
ὡρμίσαντο τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας κατὰ λιμένα τὸν Π]|αλίν- 
a 3 « ~ ~ 
ovpov, ὃς ad ἑνὸς τῶν Αἰνείου κυβερνητῶν 
τελευτήσαντος αὐτόθι ταύτης τυχεῖν λέγεται τῆς 
” = 
ὀνομασίας. ἔπειτα νήσῳ προσέσχον, 7 τοὔνομα 
7 A / 3 3 ᾿ \ > - > / 
ἔθεντο Λευκωσίαν 8 ἀπὸ γυναικὸς ἀνεψιᾶς Αἰνείου 
περὶ τόνδε τὸν τόπον ἀποθανούσης. ἐκεῖθεν δὲ 
7 > / \ ‘ \ > > ~ 
κατάραντες εἰς λιμένα βαθὺν καὶ καλὸν ἐν ᾿᾽Οπικοῖς, 
τελευτήσαντος καὶ αὐτόθι Μισηνοῦ τῶν ἐπιφανῶν 
τινος, am ἐκείνου τὸν λιμένα ὠνόμασαν, νήσῳ τε 
Προχύτῃ καὶ ἀκρωτηρίῳ Καιήτῃ τύχῃ ἡ προσορμι- 
σάμενοι κατὰ ταὐτὰ τίθενται τὰς ἐπικλήσεις τοῖς 
τόποις, γυναικῶν ἀποθανουσῶν βουλόμενοι μνημεῖα 
΄ ¢ \ 
ποιῆσαι τὰ χωρία. τούτων δὲ ἡ μὲν συγγενὴς 
Αἰνείου λέγεται γενέσθαι, ἡ δὲ τροφός. τελευτῶν- 
1 ἐλύμου Ο : “Epuxos Sylburg, Portus. 
2 προεῖχεν Sylburg: πρόσθεν R, πρόσθε Β. 
114 


BOOK T. 53, 1-3 


LIII. There are many proofs of the coming of 
Aeneas and the Trojans to Sicily, but the most 
notable are the altar of Aphrodité Aeneias erected 
on the summit of Elymus and a temple erected 
to Aeneas in Aegesta; the former was built by 
Aeneas himself in his mother’s honour, but the 
temple was an offering made by those of the ex- 
pedition who remained behind to the memory of 
their deliverer. The Trojans with Elymus and 
Aegestus, then, remained in these parts and continued 
to be called Elymians; for Elymus was the first 
in dignity, as being of the royal family, and from 
him they all took their name. But Aeneas and his 
companions, leaving Sicily, crossed the Tyrrhenian 
sea and first came to anchor in Italy in the harbour 
of Palinurus, which is said to have got this name 
from one of the pilots of Aeneas who died there. 
After that they put in at an island which they called 
Leucosia, from a woman cousin of Aeneas who died 
at that place. From there they came into a deep 
and excellent harbour of the Opicans, and when here 
also one of their number died, a prominent man 
named Misenus, they called the harbour after him. 
Then, putting in by chance at the island of Prochyta 
and at the promontory of Caieta, they named these 
places in the same manner, desiring that they should 
serve as memorials of women who died there, one 
of whom is said to have been a cousin of Aeneas 
and the other his nurse. At last they arrived at 





8 Salmasius: λευκασίαν O. 
* Καιήτῃ τύχῃ Casaubon, Steph.?: καὶ ἐπὶ τύχη B, καὶ 
ἐπιτυχεῖ Α. 


175 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


tes δὲ ἀφικνοῦνται τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας εἰς Δαύρεντον, 
ἔνθα τῆς πλάνης παυσάμενοι χάρακα ἔθεντο, καὶ 
τὸ χωρίον ἐν ᾧ κατεστρατοπεδεύσαντο ἐξ ἐκείνου 
Τροία καλεῖται, ἀπέχει δὲ τῆς θαλάττης ἀμφὶ 
τοὺς τέτταρας σταδίους. 
ΝΜ \ ~ " \ , > ’ὔ 
ἔγραψα δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τὴν παρέκβασιν ἐποιησά- 
μὴν τοῦ ἀναγκαίου χάριν, ἐπειδὴ τῶν ῖ συγγραφέων 
οἱ μὲν οὐδ᾽ ἐλθεῖν Αἰνείαν φασὶν εἰς ᾿Ϊταλίαν ἅμα 
τὰ / ε 3. Ψ > / > \ > ΕῚ / 
pwotv, ot δ᾽ ἕτερον Αἰνείαν, od τὸν ἐξ Ἀφροδίτης 
A > / / ς > >] / A 
καὶ Ayyiocov γενόμενον, ot δ᾽ AaKxavov τὸν 
3 / ¢ > »” / _ > a \ > 
Αἰνείου, οἱ δ᾽ ἄλλους τινάς. εἰσὶ δ᾽ ot τὸν ἐξ 
"A / Ai / λέ 7, Ἁ 
φροδίτης Αἰνείαν λέγουσι καταστήσαντα τὸν 
λό 2 > | λί > An tA w ὃ 
ὄχον 5 εἰς ᾿Ϊταλίαν ἀνακομισθῆναι πάλιν οἴκαδε 
καὶ βασιλεῦσαι τῆς Τροίας, τελευτῶντα δὲ κατα- 
λιπεῖν Acxaviw τῷ παιδὶ τὴν βασιλείαν, καὶ τὸ 
am ἐκείνου γένος ἐπὶ πλεῖστον κατασχεῖν τὴν 
ἀρχήν ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ εἰκάζω τοῖς “Ομήρου ἔπεσιν οὐκ 
ὀρθῶς λαμβανομένοις παρακρουσθέντες. πεποίηται 
\ > - > > / - / \ 
yap αὐτῷ ev ᾿ΪΙλιάδι Π]οσειδῶν προλέγων τὴν 
7 ») \ \ > / \ \ 3 
μέλλουσαν ἔσεσθαι περὶ τὸν Αἰνείαν καὶ τοὺς ἐξ 
ἐκείνου γενησομένους ἐπιφάνειαν ὧδέ πως" 


νῦν δὲ δὴ Αἰνείαο βίη Τρώεσσιν ἀνάξει 
καὶ παῖδες παίδων, τοί κεν μετόπισθε γένωνται. 


« ΄ Ss \ 4 > / / 
ὑπολαβόντες οὖν τὸν “Ὅμηρον ἐν Φρυγίᾳ δυναστεύ- 
οντας εἰδέναι τοὺς ἄνδρας, ὡς δὴ οὐ δυνατὸν ὃν 3 ἐν 
᾿]ταλίᾳ οἰκοῦντας βασιλεύειν Τρώων, τὴν ἀνακομι- 
δὴν τοῦ Αἰνείου ἀνέπλασαν. ἄρχειν δὲ δὴ τῶν 
/ I > / \ » / > 
Τρώων ovs ἐπήγετο καὶ ἄλλοθι πολιτευομένων οὐκ 


1 τῶν added by Ρῆυρκ. 
176 


BOOK I. 53, 3-5 


Laurentum in Italy, where, coming to the end of 
their wandering, they made an entrenched camp, 
and the place where they encamped has from that 
time been called Troy. It is distant from the sea 
about four stades. 

It was necessary for me to relate these things and 
to make this digression, since some historians affirm 
that Aeneas did not even come into Italy with the 
Trojans, and some that it was another Aeneas, not 
the son of Anchises and Aphrodité, while yet others 
say that it was Ascanius, Aeneas’ son, and others 
name still other persons. And there are those who 
claim that Aeneas, the son of Aphrodité, after he had 
settled his company in Italy, returned home, reigned 
over Troy, and dying, left his kingdom to Ascanius, 
his son, whose posterity possessed it for a long time. ~~ 
According to my conjecture these writers are de- 
ceived by mistaking the sense of Homer’s verses. 
For in the Iliad he represents Poseidon as foretelling 
the future splendour of Aeneas and his posterity 
on this wise : 


**On great Aeneas shall devolve the reign, 
And sons succeeding sons the lasting line sustain.” } 


Thus, as they supposed that Homer knew these 
men reigned in Phrygia, they invented the return of 
Aeneas, as if it were not possible for them to reign 
over Trojans while living in Italy. But it was not 
impossible for Aeneas to reign over the Trojans he 
had taken with him, even though they were settled 
1 Iliad xx. 307 f. (Pope’s translation). 
ΠΕ νυ, MRS AE ees foie δος τον aii ala! 
2 λόχον O: ὄχλον Pflugk, στόλον Naber, 
8 ὃν added by Steph.?*. 
177 
VOL. I. H 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τ ὃ , Φ ” δ᾽ Μ - > , ve δᾶ : 
ἀδύνατον ἦν" ἔχοι δ᾽ av τις τῆς ἀπάτης Kal ἑτέρας 
αἰτίας λαβεῖν. 
LIV. Εἰ δέ τινας ταράττει τὸ πολλαχῇ λέγεσθαί 
\ / / ᾽ / > / »” 
τε καὶ δείκνυσθαι τάφους Αἰνείου, ἀμηχάνου ὄντος 
> λ / \ 3... ἢ θ , θ / > θ θέ 
ἐν πλείοσι τὸν αὐτὸν τεθάφθαι χωρίοις, ἐνθυμηθέντες 
ὅτι κοινόν ἐστιν ἐπὶ πολλῶν τοῦτό γε τὸ ἄπορον 
\ / ~ > ~ \ 1 \ / / 
καὶ μάλιστα τῶν ἐπιφανεῖς μὲν; Tas τύχας, πλάνητας 
δὲ τοὺς βίους ἐσχηκότων, μαθέτωσαν ὅτι χωρίον μὲν 
ἕν τὸ δεξάμενον τὰ σώματα αὐτῶν ἦν, μνημεῖα δὲ 
παρὰ πολλοῖς κατεσκεύαστο δι᾽ εὔνοιαν τῶν ἐν ὦφε- 
λείαις τισὶ δι᾿ αὐτοὺς γενομένων, μάλιστα εἰ τοῦ 
“ἢ ~ Ἂ 
γένους αὐτῶν τι περιῆν ἢ πόλεώς τινος ἀπόκτισις ἢ 
/ / \ A / θ ΄ι e A A 
χρόνιοΐ τινες καὶ φιλάνθρωποι povat- οἷα δὴ καὶ 
\ / \ 4 θ r / ” Tht 
περὶ τόνδε TOV ἥρωα μυθολογούμενα ἴσμεν. ίῳ 
~ \ 
μὲν yap τὸ μὴ πασσυδὶ διαφθαρῆναι κατὰ τὴν 
~ \ / , 4 
ἅλωσιν παρασχών, τῇ δὲ καλουμένῃ Βεβρυκίᾳ τὸ 
~ / > / 
ἐπικουρικὸν διασωθῆναι παρασκευάσας, ev Φρυγίᾳ 
> 
δὲ τὸν υἱὸν “Aoxdavov βασιλέα καταλιπών, ev [1αλ- 
> > \ 
λήνῃ δὲ πόλιν ἐπώνυμον κτίσας, ev Apxadia δὲ 
> / \ / ~ 
θυγατέρας κηδεύσας, ev Σικελίᾳ δὲ μέρος τῆς 
~ ἴῃ. γᾶ om / 
στρατιᾶς ὑπολιπόμενος, πολλοῖς " δὲ ἄλλοις χωρίοις 
\ / ~ 
φιλανθρώπους τὰς διατριβὰς δωρήσασθαι δοκῶν, 
~ \ v ya A 
ἑκούσιον εἶχε παρ᾽ αὐτῶν τὴν εὔνοιαν, dt ἣν τὸν 
ε > - ‘ 
μετ᾽ ἀνθρώπων βίον ἐκλιπὼν ἡρῴοις ἐκοσμεῖτο καὶ 
A ΄σ > ‘ / / 
μνημάτων κατασκευαῖς πολλαχῇ. ἐπεὶ φέρε τίνας 
~ > > / > ~ 
ἂν αἰτίας ἔχοι τις ὑποθέσθαι τῶν ἐν ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ αὐτοῦ 
1 ἐπιφανεῖς μὲν Sylburg: μὲν ἐπιφανεῖς Ὁ, Jacoby. 
2 πολλοῖς Kiessling: ἐν πολλοῖς O, Jacoby. 


178 


BOOK TI. 53, 5-54, 3 


in another country. However, other reasons also 
might be given for this error. 

LIV. Butifit creates a difficulty for any that tombs 
of Aeneas are both said to exist, and are actually 
shown, in many places, whereas it is impossible for 
the same person to be buried in more than one 
place, let them consider that this difficulty arises 
in the case of many other men, too, particularly 
men who have had remarkable fortunes and led 
wandering lives; and let them know that, though 
only one place received their bodies, yet their monu- 
ments were erected among many peoples through the 
gratitude of those who had received some benefits 
from them, particularly if any of their race still 
survived or if any city had been built by them or if 
their residence among any people had been long and 
distinguished by great humanity—just such things, 
in fact, as we know are related of this hero. For he 
preserved Ilium from utter destruction at the time 
of its capture and sent away the Trojan allies safe 
to Bebrycia,! he left his son Ascanius as king in 
Phrygia, built a city named after himself in Pallené, 
married off his daughters in Arcadia, left part of 
his army in Sicily, and during his residence in many 
other places had the reputation of conducting him- 
self with great humanity ; thus he gained the volun- 
tary affection of those people and accordingly after 
he left this mortal life he was honoured with hero- 
shrines and monuments erected to him in many 
places. What reasons, pray, could anyone assign for 


1 Bebrycia was an early name for the district about 
Lampsacus on the Hellespont. The incident here men- 
tioned is otherwise unknown. 


179 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μνημάτων, εἰ μήτε ἦρξε τούτων τῶν χωρίων μήτε 
καταγωγὰς € ἐν αὐτοῖς ἐποιήσατο μήθ᾽ ὅλως ἐγνώσθη 
πρὸς αὐτῶν" ; ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων καὶ αὖθις 
λεχθήσεται, καθότι ἂν ὁ λόγος ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου καιροῦ 
δηλωθῆναι ἀπαιτῇ. 

LV. Τοῦ δὲ μηκέτι προσωτέρω τῆς Εὐρώπης 
πλεῦσαι τὸν Τρωικὸν στόλον οἵ τε χρησμοὶ αἴτιοι 
ἐγένοντο τέλος λαβόντες ἐν τούτοις τοῖς χωρίοις 
καὶ τὸ δαιμόνιον πολλαχῶς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ βούλησιν 
ἐνδεικνύμενον: ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ὅρμῳ χρησάμενοι τῷ 
Δαυρέντῳ σκηνὰς ἐπήξαντο περὶ τὸν αἰγιαλόν, 
πρῶτον μὲν πιεζομένοις τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὑπὸ δίψης 
οὐκ ἔχοντος ὕδωρ τοῦ τόπου (λέγω δὲ ἃ παρὰ τῶν 
ἐγχωρίων παρέλαβον) λιβάδες αὐτόματοι νάματος 
ἡδίστου ἐκ γῆς ἀνελθοῦσαι ὠφθησαν, ἐξ ὧν ἥ τε 
στρατιὰ πᾶσα ὑδρεύσατο καὶ ὃ τόπος περίρρυτος 
ἐγένετοΣ μέχρι θαλάττης καταβάντος ἀπὸ τῶν 
πηγῶν τοῦ ῥεύματος. νῦν μέντοι οὐκέτι πλήθουσιν 
ὥστε καὶ ἀπορρεῖν αἱ λιβάδες, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν ὀλίγον 
ὕδωρ ἐν κοίλῳ χωρίῳ συνεστηκός, λεγόμενον ὑπὸ 
τῶν ἐγχωρίων ἱερὸν ἡλίου: καὶ βωμοὶ δύο παρ᾽ 
αὐτῷ δείκνυνται, ὃ μὲν πρὸς ἀνατολὰς τετραμμένος, 
ὁ δὲ πρὸς δύσεις, Τρωικὰ ἱδρύματα, ἐφ᾽ ὧν τὸν 
Αἰνείαν μυθολογοῦσι πρώτην θυσίαν ποιήσασθαι 
τῷ θεῷ χαριστήριον τῶν ὑδάτων. ἔπειτα ἄριστον 
αὐτοῖς αἱρουμένοις ἐπὶ τοῦ δαπέδου σέλινα μὲν 
πολλοῖς ὑπέστρωτο καὶ ἦν ταῦτα ὥσπερ τράπεζα 
τῶν ἐδεσμάτων: ὡς δέ φασί τινες, ἴτρια καρποῦ 
πεποιημένα πυρίνου, καθαριότητος ταῖς τροφαῖς 


1ὃ0 


BOOK 1. 54, 3-55, 3 


his monuments in Italy if he never reigned in these 
parts or resided in them or if he was entirely unknown 
to the inhabitants ? But this point shall be again 
discussed, according as my narrative shall from time 
to time require it to be made clear. 

LY. The failure of the Trojan fleet to sail any 
farther into Europe was due both to the oracles 
which reached their fulfilment in those parts and 
to the divine power which revealed its will in many 
ways. For while their fleet lay at anchor off Lau- 
rentum and they had set up their tents near the shore, 
in the first place, when the men were oppressed 
with thirst and there was no water in the place 
(what I say I had from the inhabitants), springs of 
the sweetest water were seen rising out of the earth 
spontaneously, of which all the army drank and the 
place was flooded as the stream ran down to the 
sea from the springs. To-day, however, the springs 
are no longer so full as to overflow, but there is 
just a little water collected in a hollow place, and 
the inhabitants say it is sacred to the Sun; and near 
it two altars are pointed out, one facing to the east, 
the other to the west, both of them Trojan structures, 
upon which, the story goes, Aeneas offered up his 
first sacrifice to the god as a thank-offering for the 
water. After that, while they were taking their 
repast upon the ground, many of them strewed 
parsley under their food to serve as a table; but 
others say that they thus used wheaten cakes, in 
order to keep their victuals clean. When all the 





1 εἰ μήτε ἦρξε. . . αὐτῶν BC(?): om. ΚΒ. 
2 ἐγένετο B: γέγονε A, Jacoby. 


181 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Ὁ“ > \ A c - \ 4, 
ἕνεκα. ἐπεὶ δὲ at παρατεθεῖσαι τροφαὶ κατανά- 
λωντο, τῶν ὑπεστρωμένων αὐτοῖς σελίνων εἴτε 
> / 4 / \ “ σ 5 > 7 1 - 
ἰτρίων ἐφαγέ τις καὶ αὖθις ἕτερος " ἐν τούτῳ ' τυγ 
χάνει τις εἰπών, εἴτε τῶν Αἰνείου παίδων, ὡς λό- 
μὰ ~ 
γος ἔχει, εἴτε τῶν ὁμοσκήνων, ᾿ἣ “Ἀλλ᾽ ἡμῖν γε ἤδη 
%&, .¢ 
καὶ ἡ τράπεζα κατεδήδεσται.᾽᾽ ὡς δὲ τοῦτο ἤκουσαν, 
ἅπαντες ἀνεθορύβησαν, ὡς τὰ πρῶτα τοῦ μαντεύ- 
», / / 3 <> / / 
ματος ἤδη σφίσι τέλος ἔχοι. ἦν yap τι θέσφατον 
~ ’ 

αὐτοῖς, ws μέν τινες λέγουσιν ev Δωδώνῃ yevo- 
« 3 “ / > 5 θ -“ 2 

μενον, ws δ᾽ ἕτεροι γράφουσιν ἐν ᾿Ερυθραῖς, 

~ ” 
χωρίῳ 5 τῆς “Léns, ἔνθα wre Σίβυλλα ἐπιχωρία 
/ / Δ > ~ ” ~ > ua 
νύμφη χρησμῳδός, ἣ αὐτοῖς ἔφρασε πλεῖν ἐπὶ 
δυσμῶν ἡλίου, ἕως 3 av εἰς τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον ἔλθω- 
e / ~ 
σιν ev ᾧ κατέδονται Tas τραπέζας - ὅταν δὲ τοῦτο 
ε 
μάθωσι γενόμενον, ἡγεμόνα τετράποδα ποιησαμέ- 
- > ~ / 
vous, ὅπου av κάμῃ τὸ ζῷον, ἐνταῦθα δείμασθαι 
πόλιν. τοῦτο δὴ τὸ θεοπρόπιον ἀναμνησθέντες, 
« \ ἘΝ ~ ~ 9 / / 3 A 
οἱ μὲν τὰ ἕδη τῶν θεῶν Αἰνείου κελεύσαντος εἰς TO 
5 \ / > ΄ \ 55 c A 
ἀποδειχθὲν χωρίον ἐκ τῆς νεὼς ἐξέφερον, οἱ δὲ 
1 ἐν τούτῳ Reiske: τούτω Β, τοῦτο R. 
2 ἐρυθραῖς A: ἐρυθρᾷ Β, Jacoby. . 

8 χωρίῳ Portus: σχεσίω AB; σχεδὸν Sylburg, σχεδίῳ 
Steph., σπηλαίῳ Reiske, χρηστηρίῳ Sintenis, πεδίῳ Schaller, 


exup@ Meutzner, χέρσῳ Jacoby. 
4 ἕως Ο: τέως Jacoby. 





1 Varro, according to Servius’ comment on the Aeneid, 
iii. 256, named Dodona as the place where Aeneas received 
the oracle about the “tables.’’ Virgil (Aen. iii. 253-7), 
with a poet’s licence, put the prophecy into the mouth of 
Celaeno, the harpy. Cf. p. 187, n. 1. 

2The text is uncertain here; see critical note. Most 
editors agree on Erythrae, though we do not hear elsewhere 


182 


BOOK I. 55, 3-5 


victuals that were laid before them were consumed, 
first one of them ate of the parsley, or cakes, that were 
placed underneath, and then another. Thereupon 
one of Aeneas’ sons, as the story goes, or some other 
of his messmates, happened to exclaim, “ Look you, 
at last we have eaten even the table.” As soon as 
they heard this, they all cried out with joy that the 
first part of the oracle was now fulfilled. For a 
certain oracle had been delivered to them, as some 
say, in Dodona,! but, according to others, in Ery- 
thrae, a place ? on Mount Ida, where lived a 5100] of 
that country, a prophetic nymph, who ordered them 
to sail westward till they came to a place where they 
should eat their tables; and that, when they found 
this had happened, they should follow a four-footed 
beast as their guide, and wherever the animal grew 
wearied, there they should build a city. Calling to 
mind, then, this prophecy, some at the command of 
Aeneas brought the images of the gods out of the 
ship to the place appointed by him, others prepared 


of any Erythrae near Ida; conjectures as to the meaning 
of the following word vary from “ near ”’ to “ oracle’ and 
““cave.”’ For the two words together Jacoby reads “ red 
land.’’ If Erythrae is the correct reading here, it would 
seem that Dionysius confused the Sibyl of Marpessus in 
the Troad with the famous Sibyl of Erythrae in Ionia. 
With this exception, the story here related may be assumed 
to be approximately the original form of the legend, which 
would naturally represent Aeneas as receiving the oracle 
from the local Sibyl before setting out on his voyage ; 
later, when her fame became eclipsed by that of the 
Erythraean Sibyl, her réle in the legend may have been 
transferred to the latter. For a recent discussion of the 
Sibyls see Buchholz in Roscher’s Lexikon der griech. und 
rom. Mythologie, s.v. Sibylla. 


183 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


βάθρα καὶ βωμοὺς κατεσκεύαζον αὐτοῖς, ai δὲ 
γυναῖκες ὀλολυγῇ καὶ χορείαις χρώμεναι παρεκό- 
μιζον τὰ ἱερά, οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ τὸν Αἰνείαν παρα- 
σκευασθείσης θυσίας ἔχοντες τοὺς στεφάνους περὶ 
τὸν βωμὸν ἔστησαν. 

LVI. Ἔν ᾧ δὲ οὗτοι τὰς εὐχὰς ἐποιήσαντο, ἡ 
μέλλουσα καθιεροῦσθαι ὗς ἐγκύμων οὖσα καὶ οὐ 
πρόσω τόκου καταρχομένων αὐτῆς τῶν θυτήρων 
διασεισαμένη καὶ ἀποφυγοῦσα τοὺς κατέχοντας 
ἄνω 1 ἔθει. Αἰνείας δὲ μαθὼν ὅτι ταύτην ἄρα τὴν 
τετράποδα ἡγεμόνα τὸ θέσφατον αὐτοῖς ἐδήλου 
παρηκολούθει σὺν ὀλίγοις μικρὸν ὑπολειπόμενος, 
δεδοικὼς μὴ ὑπὸ θορύβου τῶν διωκόντων ἀποτρα- 
πείη τῆς κατὰ δαίμονα ὁδοῦ. καὶ ἡ μὲν ἀμφὶ 
τοὺς εἴκοσι καὶ τέτταρας σταδίους ἀπὸ θαλάττης 
διελθοῦσα λόφον τινὰ προσανατρέχει, ἔνθα ὑπὸ 
καμάτου μοχθήσασα καθέζεται. τῷ δὲ Αἰνείᾳ 
(τέλος γὰρ τὰ μαντεύματα ἐφαίνετο ἔχειν) ὁρῶντι 
τὸ χωρίον γῆς τε οὐκ ἐν καλῷ καὶ θαλάττης πρόσω 
καὶ οὐδὲ ταύτης ἐνορμίσασθαι ἀγαθῆς, πολλὴ παρ- 
ίσταται ἀμηχανία, πότερα χρὴ τῷ θεσφάτῳ πειθο- 
μένους αὐτοῦ κατοικεῖν, ἔνθα λυπηρὸν εἰσαεὶ βίον 
τρίψουσιν οὐδενὸς χρηστοῦ ἀπολαύοντες, ἢ προ- 
σωτέρω χωρητέον ἐπὶ γῆς ἀμείνονος μάστευσιν. 
ταῦτα δὲ αὐτῷ διανοουμένῳ καὶ τοὺς θεοὺς ἔχοντι 
δι᾿ αἰτίας ἄφνω λέγεται φωνή τις ἐκ τῆς νάπης 
ἀφανοῦς ὄντος τοῦ φθεγγομένου προσπεσεῖν κελεύ- 
ουσα μένειν τε αὐτόθι καὶ πολίζεσθαι διὰ ταχέων 
καὶ μὴ τῷ ἀπόρῳ τῆς παρούσης δόξης ἐπιτρέψαντα, 

1 ἄνω Jacoby: ἄνω θαλάττης O; ἀπὸ θαλάττης Kiessling. 
184 


BOOK TI. 55, 5-56, 3 


pedestals and altars for them, and the women with 
shouts and dancing accompanied the images. And 
Aeneas with his companions, when a sacrifice had 
been made ready, stood round the altar with the 
customary garlands on their heads. 

LVI. While these were offering up their prayers, 
the sow which was the destined victim, being big 
with young and near her time, shook herself free 
as the priests were performing the initial rites, 
and fleeing from those who held her, ran back into 
the country. And Aeneas, understanding that this, 
then, was the four-footed beast the oracle indicated 
as their guide, followed the sow with a few of his 
people at a small distance, fearing lest, disturbed 
by her pursuers, she might be frightened from the 
course fate had appointed for her. And the sow, 
after going about twenty-four stades from the sea, 
ran up a hill and there, spent with weariness, she 
lay down. But Aeneas,—for the oracles seemed 
now to be fulfilled_—observing that the place was 
not only in a poor part of the land, but also at a 
distance from the sea, and that even the latter did 
not afford a safe anchorage, found himself in great 
perplexity whether they ought in obedience to the 
oracle to settle there, where they would lead a life of 
perpetual misery without enjoying any advantage, 
or ought to go farther in search of better land. 
While he was pondertng thus and blaming the 
gods, on a sudden, they say, a voice came to him 
from the wood,—though the speaker was not to 
be seen,—commanding him to stay there and build 
a city immediately, and not, by giving way to the 
difficulty occasioned by his present opinion, just 


185 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


εἰ μὴ ev εὐβότῳ γῇ τὸν βίον ἱδρύσεται, THY μέλλου- 
σάν τε καὶ ὅσον οὔπω παροῦσαν εὐτυχίαν ἀπώσασθαι. 
εἶναι γὰρ αὐτῷ πεπρωμένον ἐκ ταύτης ὁρμώμενον 
τῆς λυπρᾶς καὶ ὀλίγης τὸ πρῶτον οἰκήσεως πολλὴν 
καὶ ἀγαθὴν ἐπικτήσασθαι γῆν σὺν χρόνῳ παισὶ δὲ 
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐγγόνοις ἀρχὴν ἢ μεγίστην καὶ ἐπὶ πλεῖ- 
στον χρόνον ἐκμηκυνθησομένην ὑπάρξαι. ταύτην 
μὲν οὖν ἐν τῷ παρόντι καταγωγὴν ἔσεσθαι τοῖς 
Τρωσί: μετὰ δὲ τοσούτους ἐνιαυτοὺς ὅσους av ἡ 
ὗς τέκῃ χοίρους κτισθήσεσθαι πρὸς τῶν ἐξ ἐκείνου 
γενησομένων πόλιν ἑτέραν εὐδαίμονα καὶ μεγάλην. 
μαθόντα δὲ τὸν Αἰνείαν καὶ νομίσαντα δαιμόνιόν τι 
τὸ χρῆμα τῆς φωνῆς εἶναι ποιεῖν ὡς ὁ θεὸς ἐκέ- 
λευεν. ἕτεροι δὲ λέγουσιν ἀδημονοῦντι τῷ ἀνδρὶ 
καὶ παρεικότι τὸ σῶμα ὑπὸ λύπης καὶ οὔτε ἐπὶ 
τὸ στρατόπεδον 5 καταβάντι οὔτε σῖτα προσενεγ- 
καμένῳ, αὐτοῦ δὲ ὡς ἔτυχεν αὐλισθέντι τὴν νύκτα 
ἐκείνην, ἐπιστῆναι μεγάλην τινὰ καὶ θαυμαστὴν 
ἐνυπνίου τῶν θεῶν τινι τῶν πατρίων εἰκασθεῖσαν 
ὄψιν τὰ λεχθέντα μικρῷ πρότερον ὑποτιθεμένην" 
ὁποτέρως δὲ τἀληθὲς ἔχει θεοῖς ἂν εἴη γνώριμον. 
τῇ δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἡμέρᾳ τριάκοντα λέγεται χοίρους ἡ ὗς 
ἐκτεκεῖν, καὶ τοσούτοις ἐνιαυτοῖς ὕστερον ὑπὸ τῶν 
Τρώων ἑτέρα κτισθῆναι πόλις κατὰ τὸ θέσφατον, 
ὑπὲρ ἧς ἐν τῷ οἰκείῳ τόπῳ διαλέξομαι. 


: ; ἀρχὴν Kiessling: ἔσεσθαι ἀρχὴν O, Jacoby. 
* τὸ added by Bicheler. 
3 ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον Biicheler: ἐπὶ (ὑπὸ A) τοῦ στρατοπέδου 
ΑΒ. 
4 τῷ added by Grasberger. 


186 


BOOK 1. 56. 3-5 


because he would be establishing his abode in a 
barren country, to reject his future good fortune, 
that was indeed all but actually present. For 
it was fated that, beginning with this sorry and, at 
first, small habitation, he should in the course of 
time acquire a spacious and fertile country, and that 
his children and posterity should possess a vast 
empire which should be prolonged for many ages. 
For the present, therefore, this settlement should be 
a refuge for the Trojans, but, after as many years 
as the sow should bring forth young ones, another 
city, large and flourishing, should be built by his pos- 
terity. It is said that Aeneas, hearing this and 
looking upon the voice as something divine, did as 
the god commanded. But others say that while 
he was dismayed and had neglected himself in his 
grief, to such a degree that he neither came into the 
camp nor took any food, but spent that night just as 
he was, a great and wonderful vision of a dream ap- 
peared to him in the likeness of one of his country’s 
gods and gave him the advice just before mentioned. 
Which of these accounts is the true one the gods only 
know.? The next day, it is said, the sow brought 
forth thirty young ones, and just that many years 
later, in accordance with the oracle, another city 
was built by the Trojans, concerning which I shall 
speak in the proper place.” 


1Virgil (Aen. viii. 42-48) represents the river-god 
Tiberinus as announcing the omen of the sow and her 
young to Aeneas and this omen is seen the very next day 
(vs. 81-85). 

2 Chap. 66. 


187 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


LVIL Αἰνείας δὲ τῆς μὲν ὑὸς τὸν τόκον ἅμα τῇ 
γειναμένῃ τοῖς πατρῴοις ἁγίζει θεοῖς ἐν τῷ χωρίῳ 
τῷδ᾽, οὗ νῦν ἐστιν ἡ καλιάς, καὶ αὐτὴν of “αουινιά- 
ται τοῖς ἄλλοις ἄβατον φυλάττοντες ἱερὰν νομίζουσι" 
τοῖς δὲ Τρωσὶ μεταστρατοπεδεῦσαι κελεύσας ἐπὶ τὸν 
λόφον ἱδρύεται τὰ ἕδη τῶν θεῶν ἐν τῷ κρατίστῳ καὶ 
αὐτίκα περὶ τὴν κατασκευὴν τοῦ πολίσματος ἁπάσῃ 
προθυμίᾳ ὥρμητο ἐλάμβανέ τε καταθέων ἐκ τῶν 
πέριξ χωρίων ὁπόσα εἰς τὸν πολισμὸν αὐτῷ ἦν χρή- 
σιμα καὶ μάλιστα ἔμελλε λυπηρὰ τοῖς ἀφαιρεθεῖσι 
φανήσεσθαι, σίδηρον καὶ ξύλα καὶ τὰς γεωργικὰς 
παρασκευάς. Aativw δέ, ὃς ἦν τότε βασιλεύς, 
πολεμοῦντι πρὸς ἔθνος ὅμορον τοὺς καλουμένους 
“Ροτόλους καὶ δυσημεροῦντι κατὰ τὰς μάχας ἀγγέλ- 
λεται τὰ γινόμενα ἐπὶ τὸ φοβερώτατον, ὡς ἀνά- 
στατος αὐτοῦ γίνεται πᾶσα ἡ παράλιος ὑπερορίῳ 
στρατιᾷ, καὶ εἰ μὴ σὺν τάχει κωλύσει τὰ δρώμενα, 
χρυσὸς | αὐτῷ φανήσεται ὁ πρὸς τοὺς ἀστυγείτονας 
ἀγών. ἀκούσαντι δὲ τῷ ἀνδρὶ δέος εἰσέρχεται καὶ 
αὐτίκα τοῦ παρόντος πολέμου μεθέμενος ἐπὶ τοὺς 
Τρῶας ἐλαύνει πολλῇ στρατιᾷ. ὁρῶν δὲ αὐτοὺς 

1 χρυσὸς Cobet: ὀχυρὸὲὸ ΑΒ. Cobet, in his Variae 
Lectiones, pp. 235 f., points out several passages in Greek 
authors where χρυσός has been similarly corrupted (among 


them Dionysius ix. 25, 1, where only Ba reads χρυσός, 


the others χρηστός) The expression first appears in 
Euripides, Troades 431 ff. : 


δύστηνος, οὐκ οἶδ᾽ οἷά νιν μένει παθεῖν" 
ὡς χρυσὸς αὐτῷ τἀμὰ καὶ Φρυγῶν κακὰ 
δόξει ποτ᾽ εἶναι. : 


188 


BOOK I. 57, 1-3 


LVII. Aeneas sacrificed the sow with her young 
to his household gods in the place where now stands 
the chapel, which the Lavinians look upon as sacred 
and preserve inaccessible to all but themselves. 
Then, having ordered the Trojans to remove their 
camp to the hill, he placed the images of the gods 
in the best part of it and immediately addressed 
himself to the building of the town with the greatest 
zeal. And making descents into the country round 
about, he took from there such things as were of 
use to him in building and the loss of which was 
likely to be the most grievous to the owners, such 
as iron, timber and agricultural implements. But 
Latinus, the king of the country at that time, who 
was at war with a neighbouring people called the 
Rutulians and had fought some battles with ill 
success, received an account of what had passed in 
the most alarming form, to the effect that all his 
coast was being laid waste by a foreign army and 
that, if he did not immediately put a stop to their 
depredations, the war with his neighbours would 
seem to him a joy! in comparison. Latinus was 
struck with fear at this news, and immediately aban- 
doning the war in which he was then engaged, he 
marched against the Trojans with a great army. But 


1 Literally ‘“‘ gold.’’ This expression seems to have 
become proverbial in comparisons between a lesser and a 
greater evil. See critical note. 





* Wretch !—he knows not what sufferings wait for him, 
Such that my woes and Phrygia’s yet shall seem 
As gold to them.”’ 
(Way’s translation in the Loeb Classical Library.) 


189 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ὡπλισμένους τε ὡς Ἕλληνας καὶ ἐν τάξει εὐκόσμῳ 
ἀκαταπλήκτως τὸ δεινὸν ὑπομένοντας, τῆς μὲν 
> / . ὃ ΄ ς > nv > > / 

αὐτίκα παρακινδυνεύσεως, ws οὐκ av ἐξ ἐφόδου 
αὐτοὺς ἔτι χειρωσάμενος, καθ᾽ Hv? ἔσχε διάνοιαν 3 
οἴκοθεν ὁρμώμενος, ἀποτρέπεται: στρατοπεδευσά- 

> - ee | 7 \ A ~ > ~ 
μενος δ᾽ ἐπὶ λόφου τινὸς τὸ πρῶτον ἀναλαβεῖν 
ᾧετο δεῖν τὴν δύναμιν ἐκ τοῦ παρόντος κόπου, ὃς 
πολὺς ἐκ μακρᾶς ὁδοῦ καὶ συντόνου διώξεως αὐτοῖς 
ἐγένετο. αὐλισάμενος * δὲ διὰ νυκτὸς αὐτόθι γνώμην 
ἐποιεῖτο ἀρχομένης ἕω συμφέρεσθαι τοῖς πολεμίοις. 
ἐγνωκότι δὲ αὐτῷ ταῦτα λέγει τις ἐπιστὰς καθ᾽ 
-“ > [4 / / A a ~ 
ὕπνον ἐπιχώριος δαίμων δέχεσθαι τοὺς “EAAnvas τῇ 
χώρᾳ συνοίκους ἥκειν γὰρ αὐτοὺς μέγα ὠφέλημα 

4 \ \ 3 / > / > / 

Δατίνῳ καὶ κοινὸν Αβοριγίνων ἀγαθόν: Αἰνείᾳ τε 
οἱ πατρῷοι θεοὶ τῆς αὐτῆς νυκτὸς φανέντες παρα- 
κελεύονται πείθειν Λατῖνον ἑκόντα παρασχεῖν σφίσι 
τὴν οἴκησιν ἐν ᾧ βούλονται χωρίῳ, καὶ χρήσασθαι 
δυνάμει ᾿λληνικῇ συμμάχῳ μᾶλλον ἢ διαφόρῳ: 
ἀμφοτέρους δὲ τὸ ὄναρ ἐκώλυεν ἄρχειν μάχης. ὡς 
δὲ ἡμέρα τε ἐγένετο καὶ διεκοσμήθησαν εἰς μάχην 
αἱ δυνάμεις, κήρυκες ἧκον ὡς τοὺς ἡγεμόνας ἑκατέ- 
ρωθεν τὸ αὐτὸ ἀξιοῦντες, συνελθεῖν ἀλλήλοις εἰς 
λόγους καὶ ἐγένετο τοῦτο. 

LVIII. Πρῶτος δὲ ὁ Λατῖνος ἔγκλημα ποιού- 
μενος τὸν αἰφνίδιόν τε καὶ ᾿ἀκατάγγελτον πόλεμον 
ἠξίου τὸν Αἰνείαν λέγειν, ὅστις ὧν καὶ τί βουλό- 
μενος ἄγει καὶ φέρει τὰ χωρία πεπονθώς τε οὐδὲν 


1 Madvig: χειρωσόμενος O. 
2 καθ᾽ ἣν O: ἣν Kiessling, Jacoby. 
4 Bae Reiske: Aoav ABa, δόξαν Bb. 


4Steph.: αὐλισαμένοις AB. 
190 


BOOK 1. 57, 3-58, 1 


seeing them armed like Greeks, drawn up in good 
order and resolutely awaiting the conflict, he gave 
up the idea of hazarding an immediate engagement, 
since he saw no probability now of defeating them 
at the first onset, as he had expected when he set out 
from home against them. And encamping on a hill, 
he thought he ought first to let his troops recover 
from their present fatigue, which from the length of 
the march and the eagerness of the pursuit was very 
great ; and passing the night there, he was resolving 
to engage the enemy at break of day. But when he 
had reached this decision, a certain divinity of the 
place appeared to him in his sleep and bade him 
receive the Greeks into his land to dwell with his 
own subjects, adding that their coming was a great 
advantage to him and a benefit to all the Aborigines 
alike. And the same night Aeneas’ household gods 
appeared to him and admonished him to persuade 
Latinus to grant them of his own accord a settle- 
ment in the part of the country they desired and 
to treat the Greek forces rather as allies than as 
enemies. Thus the dream hindered both of them 
from beginning an engagement. And as soon as 
it was day and the armies were drawn up in order 
of battle, heralds came to each of the commanders 
from the other with the same request, that they 
should meet for a parley; and so it came to 
ass. 

LVIII. And first Latinus complained of the sudden 
war which they had made upon his subjects without 
any previous declaration and demanded that Aeneas 
tell him who he was and what he meant by plunder- 
ing the country without any provocation, since he 


191 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δεινὸν πρότερος Kal οὐκ ἀγνοῶν ὅτι τὸν ἄρχοντα 
πολέμου πᾶς 6 προπαθὼν ἀμύνεται" παρασχόν τε 
vn b] ~ ~ ” QA / \ / 
ἂν αὐτῷ πᾶν, εἴ twos ἐδεῖτο μετρίου, πρὸς φιλίαν 
καὶ παρ᾽ ἑκόντων εὑρίσκεσθαι τῶν ἐγχωρίων, παρελ- 
θ A \ ¢ / > θ Ψ ὃ / ” Ἅ 
ὧν τὴν ἁπάντων ἀνθρώπων δικαίωσιν αἴσχιον ἢ 
κάλλιον ἠξίωσε βίαν προσφέρων τὰ αὐτὰ λαμβάνειν. 
τοιαῦτα δὲ αὐτοῦ διαλεχθέντος ἀπεκρίνατο Αἰνείας " 
“Ἡμεϊς γένος μὲν Τρῶές ἐσμεν, πόλεως δὲ οὐ τῆς 
ἀφανεστάτης ἐν “Ἕλλησιν ἐγενόμεθα: ἣν ἀφαιρε- 
/ ς 3 > ~ - ͵ὔ ~ 
θέντες ὑπ᾽ ᾿Αχαιῶν δεκαετεῖ πολέμῳ χειρωθεῖσαν, 
ἀλῆται περιερχόμενοι πόλεώς τε καὶ χώρας ἐν ἧ τὸ 
\ > / > 4 a \ / / 
λοιπὸν οἰκήσομεν ἀπορίᾳ, θεοῖς δὲ κελεύουσι πειθό- 
~ tc a 
μενοι δεῦρ᾽ ἀφίγμεθα καὶ ἡμῖν ws ta θέσφατα 
/ \ ~ / -“ ε ~ / / 
λέγει λιμὴν τῆς πλάνης ἥδε ἡ γῆ μόνη λείπεται. 
/ θ δὲ bd ~ / e ε - ὃ A ὃ ͵ὔ 
ποριζόμεθα δὲ ἐκ τῆς χώρας ὧν ἡμῖν δεῖ δυστυχέ- 
~ Ἅ > / ς σ 1 / 
στερον μᾶλλον ἢ εὐπρεπέστερον, ὡς ἥκιστα ' τέως 
γε" ἐβουλόμεθα. ἀμειψόμεθα δὲ αὐτὰ πολλαῖς καὶ 
ἀγαθαῖς ἔργων ἀμοιβαῖς παρέχοντες ὑμῖν καὶ σώ- 
ματα καὶ ψυχὰς εὖ πρὸς τὰ δεινὰ πεπαιδευμένας 
~ \ ~ 
χρῆσθαι ὁπόσα βούλεσθε, τὴν ὑμετέραν γῆν φυλάτ- 
Ts) / \ ὃ \ ~ A if 6 ,ὔ 
τοντες ἀδήωτον, τὴν δὲ τῶν πολεμίων προθύμως 
7ὕ « / \ ε ~ / A 
συγκατακτώμενοι. ἱκέται δὲ ὑμῶν γινόμεθα μὴ 
\ > \ \ ΄ λ / > A θέ 
πρὸς ὀργὴν τὰ πεπραγμένα λαμβάνειν, ἐνθυμηθέντας 
3 > - J” ~ 
ws ov σὺν ὕβρει, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀνάγκης ταῦτα βιασθέντες 


192 


BOOK I. 58. 1-3 


could not be ignorant that every one who is attacked 
in war defends himself against the aggressor ; 
and he complained that when Aeneas might have 
obtained amicably and with the consent of the 
inhabitants whatever he could reasonably desire, 
he had chosen to take it by force, contrary to the 
universal sense of justice and with greater dishonour 
than credit to himself. After he had spoken thus 
Aeneas answered: ‘“* We are natives of Troy, not the 
least famous city among the Greeks; but since this 
has been captured and taken from us by the Achaeans 
after a ten-years’ war, we have been wanderers, 
roving about for want both of a city and a country 
where we may henceforth live, and are come hither in 
obedience to the commands of the gods; and this 
land alone, as the oracles tell us, is left for us as the 
haven of our wandering. We are indeed taking 
from the country the things we need, with greater 
regard to our unfortunate situation than to pro- 
priety,—a course which until recently we by no 
means wished to pursue. But we will make com- 
pensation for them with many good services in 
return, offering you our bodies and our minds, well 
disciplined against dangers, to employ as you think 
proper in keeping your country free from the ravages 
of enemies and in heartily assisting you to conquer 
their lands. We humbly entreat you not to resent 
what we have done, realizing, as you must, that we 
did it, not out of wantonness, but constrained by 


1 ἥκιστα O: ἥδιστα Jacoby. 
2 -éws ye Schmitz: νεωστὶ O, Jacoby. 


193 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> ~ 5 a δὲ / "ἢ \ > / ‘ 
4 ἐποιοῦμεν. ἅπαν δὲ avyyvwpov! τὸ ἀκούσιον. καὶ 
δεῖ ὑμᾶς μηδὲν ἐναντίον βουλεῦσαι περὶ ἡμῶν 
χεῖρας προεχομένων, εἰ δὲ μή, θεοὺς καὶ δαίμονας 
οἵ κατέχουσι τήνδε τὴν γῆν παραιτούμενοι συγγνώ- 
μονας ἡμῖν aoe ὦ καὶ ὧν ἠναγκασμένοι δρῶμεν 
πειρασόμεθα πολέμου ἄρχοντας ὑμᾶς ἀμύνεσθαι. 
οὐ γὰρ ἂν νῦν πρώτου" οὐδὲ μεγίστου πολέμου 
5 τοῦδε ἀπολαύσαιμεν.᾽ ws δὲ ταῦτα ὁ “Λατῖνος 
» 5 ,ὔ A » / rt te 
ἤκουσεν ἀπεκρίνατο πρὸς αὐτόν" AXA’ ἔγωγε 
εὔνοιάν τε πρὸς ἅπαν τὸ “Ἑλληνικὸν γένος ἔχω 
καὶ συμφοραῖς ἀνθρώπων ἀναγκαίαις πάνυ ἄχθομαι, 
σώζεσθαί τε ὑμᾶς περὶ πολλοῦ ἂν ποιησαίμην, εἴ 
μοι δῆλοι γένοισθε οἰκήσεως δεόμενοι ἥκειν ἐν 
ἀποχρώσῃ τε γῆς μοίρᾳ καὶ πρὸς φιλίαν τῶν 
7] / 3 » Σ A > A 
δοθησομένων μεθέξοντες, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ τὴν ἐμὴν δυνα- 
/ 5 / A ᾿" , - tater | / 
στείαν ἀφαιρησόμενοι πρὸς βίαν. εἰ δ᾽ ἐπαληθεύεται 
ὑμῖν δὸ᾽ ὁ λόγος πίστεις τούτων ἀξιῶ δοῦναι καὶ 
A a 4 ¢ ~ > / Ἁ ς ,ὔ 99 
λαβεῖν, at φυλάξουσιν ἡμῖν ἀδόλους τὰς ὁμολογίας. 
LIX. Αἰνείου δὲ ἐπαινέσαντος τὰ λεγόμενα yi- 
~ ~ | A 
νονται συνθῆκαι τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ἐφ᾽ ὃ ὁρκίων τοιαίδε" 
"A wn \ T \ ὃ ~ / σ Ἅ / 
βοριγῖνας μὲν Τρωσὶ δοῦναι χώραν ὅσην ἠξίουν 
ἀμφὶ τοὺς τετταράκοντα σταδίους πανταχοῦ πορευο- 
/ > \ ~ , ~ "νυ ~ ~ 39 
μένοις ἀπὸ τοῦ λόφου: Τρῶας δὲ ABopryiat τοῦ τ 


1 Kiessling: συγγνώμη ABb, συγγνώμης Ba. 
* Sylburg: πρῶτον O. 8 ἐφ᾽ Kiessling: ὑφ᾽ O. 





1 In Thucydides iii. 40, 1, we find the expression ξύγγνωμόν 
δ᾽ ἐστὶ τὸ ἀκούσιον. But Jacoby points out that the two 
passages are otherwise very different in their tenor, and 
hence concludes that Dionysius was not imitating the 


194 


BOOK I. 58, 4-59, 1 


necessity; and everything that is involuntary deserves 
forgiveness.!_ And you ought not to take any hostile 
resolution concerning us as we stretch forth our hands 
to you; but if you do so, we will first beg the gods 
and divinities who possess this land to forgive us 
even for what we do under the constraint of necessity 
and will then endeavour to defend ourselves against 
you who are the aggressors in the war; for this will 
not be the first nor the greatest war that we have 
experienced.’’ When Latinus heard this he answered 
him: ‘* Nay, but I cherish a kindly feeling towards 
the whole Greek race and am greatly grieved by 
the inevitable calamities of mankind. And I should 
be very solicitous for your safety if it were clear to 
me that you have come here in search of a habitation 
and that, contented with a suitable share of the land 
and enjoying in a spirit of friendship what shall 
be given you, you will not endeavour to deprive me 
of the sovereignty by force; and if the assurances 
you give me are real, I desire to give and receive 
pledges which will preserve our compact inviolate.” 
LIX. Aeneas having accepted this proposal, a 
treaty was made between the two nations and con- 
firmed by oaths to this effect: the Aborigines were 
to grant to the Trojans as much land as they desired, 
that is, the space of about forty stades in every 
direction from the hill; the Trojans, on their part, 


older historian. He believes, rather, that the source of 
both was a verse of some poet, probably ξύγγνωμόν ἐστ᾽ 
ω-- ἅπαν taxovowv. The same sentiment, though not ex- 
pressed in exactly the same words, is met with in Thue. iv. 
98, 6, Plato, Phaedrus 233c, and Aristotle, Eth. Nicom. 
ne Ail. 


195 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἐν χερσὶ πολέμου συλλαβέσθαι καὶ ὅπου ἂν ἄλλῃ 

παρακαλῶνται συστρατεύειν: κοινῇ δὲ ἀμφοτέρους 

τὰ κράτιστα ὑπὲρ ἀλλήλων πράττειν καὶ χειρὶ καὶ 

γνώμῃ. συνθέμενοι δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τέκνων ὁμηρείαις 

τὰς πίστεις βεβαιώσαντες κοινῇ στρατεύουσιν ἐπὶ 

\ / ~ « / > SAVE A > ~ 

τὰς πόλεις τῶν ἱΡοτόλων: δι᾽ ὀλίγου δὲ τἀκεῖ 

~ > \ 
πάντα χειρωσάμενοι παρῆσαν ἐπὶ TO πόλισμα TO 
ε «σὰ SE ~ 
Τρωικὸν ἡμιτελὲς ἔτ᾽ Ov! καὶ μιᾷ προθυμίᾳ πάντες 
5d \ ~ 

χρώμενοι τειχίζουσιν αὐτό. “ὄνομα δὲ τῷ κτίσματι 

Αἰνείας τίθεται Λαουΐνιον, ὡς μὲν αὐτοὶ “Ῥωμαῖοι 

λέγουσιν, ἀπὸ τῆς Aativov θυγατρός, 7 Λαουϊνίαν 3 
» > ζω ς 

εἶναί φασι τοὔνομα: ὡς δ᾽ ἄλλοι τινὲς τῶν ᾿Ελλη- 

~ 6 / Zr > \ a > / 3 “ 

νικῶν μυθογράφων ἔλεξαν, ἀπὸ τῆς Aviov*® τοῦ 

λί 4 λέ θ / A pa) I \ ~ 
Anriwv* βασι sarhhing gt aovivias Kal τῆσδε 
> ,ὔ 

ὀνομαζομένης, Hs ® ἀποθανούσης νόσῳ περὶ τὸν 
> e ΝΜ 

οἰκισμὸν τῆς πόλεως πρώτης καὶ ἐν ᾧ ἔκαμε 

χωρίῳ ταφείσης μνῆμα γενέσθαι τὴν πόλιν. συμ- 

πλεῦσαι δ᾽ αὐτὴν τοῖς Τρωσὶ λέγεται. δοθεῖσαν ὑ ὑπὸ 

τοῦ πατρὸς Αἰνείᾳ δεηθέντι μαντικὴν οὖσαν καὶ 
7 / \ 7 \ \ ~ 

σοφήν. λέγεται δὲ κατὰ τὸν πολισμὸν τοῦ Aa- 

ουϊνίου σημεῖα τοῖς Τρωσὶ γενέσθαι τοιάδε: πυρὸς 

> ~ 

αὐτομάτως ἀναφθέντος ἐκ τῆς νάπης λύκον μὲν 
/ ~ / ~ ~ Ὁ > / 

κομίζοντα τῷ στόματι τῆς ξηρᾶς ὕλης ἐπιβάλλειν 

~ > 

ἐπὶ τὸ πῦρ, ἀετὸν δὲ προσπετόμενον ἀναρριπίζειν 

1 ἡμιτελὲς ἔτ᾽ ὃν Sintenis: ἡμιτέλεστον ABa, ἡμιτέλεστον ov Bb. 

2 Cary (after Sylburg): λαῦναν Ba, λάυναν A, λαυινίαν Bb. 

Three lines below, and in 64, 1 B has Aaovwias, in 60, 1 Bb 

has Aaovwiav; elsewhere B agrees with the other MSS. 

in reading λαῦνα or λαύνα (δύνας in 32, 1). “αῦνα is nota 


Greek name, and Dionysius can hardly have written such 
an inaccurate form. 


196 


BOOK IT. 59, 1-4 


were to assist the Aborigines in the war they were 
then engaged in and also to join them with their 
forces upon every other occasion when summoned ; 
and, mutually, both nations were to aid each other 
to the utmost of their power, both with their arms 
and with their counsel. After they had concluded 
this treaty and had given pledges by handing over 
children as hostages, they marched with joint forces 
against the cities of the Rutulians; and having soon 
subdued all opposition there, they came to the town 
of the Trojans, which was still but half-finished, 
and all working with a common zeal, they fortified 
the town with a wall. This town Aeneas called 
Lavinium, after the daughter of Latinus, according 
to the Romans’ own account; for her name, they 
say, was Lavinia. But according to some of the 
Greek mythographers he named it after the daughter 
of Anius, the king of the Delians, who was also 
called Lavinia; for as she was the first to die of 
illness at the time of the building of the city and 
was buried in the place where she died, the city was 
made her memorial. She is said to have embarked 
with the Trojans after having been given by her 
father to Aeneas at his desire as a prophetess and 
a wise woman. While Lavinium was _ building, 
the following omens are said to have appeared to 
the Trojans. When a fire broke out spontaneously 
in the forest, a wolf, they say, brought some dry 
wood in his mouth and threw it upon the fire, and 
an eagle, flying thither, fanned the flame with the 





8 τῆς ᾿Ανίου Steph. : cawiov ABa, ceAwiov Bb. 
4 δηλίων B: δήλου A. ® ἧς added by Steph. 


197 


Or 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τῇ κινήσει τῶν πτερύγων τὴν φλόγα. τούτοις δὲ 
τἀναντία μηχανωμένην. ἀλώπεκα τὴν οὐρὰν διά- 
βροχον ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ φέρουσαν ἐπιρραπίζειν τὸ 
καιόμενον πῶ, καὶ τοτὲ μὲν τοὺς ἀνάπτοντας 
ἐπικρατεῖν, τοτὲ δὲ τὴν ἀποσβέσαι βουλομένην" 
τέλος δὲ νικῆσαι τοὺς δύο, καὶ τὴν ἑτέραν οἴχεσθαι 
\ 5 - / > / \ \ 5 / 
μηδὲν ἔτι ποιεῖν δυναμένην. ἰδόντα δὲ τὸν Αἰνείαν 
- » 
εἰπεῖν ὡς ἐπιφανὴς μὲν ἔσται καὶ θαυμαστὴ καὶ 
/ > \ - -“ ς 3 / 3 / 
γνώσεως ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἥξουσα ἡ ἀποικία, ἐπίφθονος 
δὲ τοῖς πέλας αὐξομένη καὶ λυπηρά, κρατήσει δ᾽ 
ὅμως τῶν ἀντιπραττόντων κρείττονα τὴν ἐκ τοῦ 
θείου τύχην λαβοῦσα τοῦ παρ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἐναντιω- 
σομένου φθόνου. ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτω περιφανῆ 
μηνύματα λέγεται γενέσθαι τῶν συμβησομένων τῇ 
πόλει, καὶ ἔστιν αὐτῶν μνημεῖα ἐν τῇ “αουϊνιατῶν 
> ~ / ” ~ / > ~ 4 
ἀγορᾷ χάλκεα εἴδωλα τῶν ζῴων ἐκ πολλοῦ πάνυ 
χρόνου διατηρούμενα. 
7 - « 
LX. ᾿Επειδὴ δὲ κατεσκευάσθη τοῖς Τρωσὶν ἡ 
~ > 
πόλις, ἐπιθυμία πάντας ἴσχεν ἰσχυρὰ τοῦ παρ 
5 / > ~ / ‘ « ~ > 
ἀλλήλων ἀπολαῦσαι χρησίμου, Kat ot βασιλεῖς αὐ- 
~ ~ ~ \ 
τῶν πρῶτοι ἄρχουσι μίξαντες τοῦ τε ἐπιχωρίου καὶ 
is > / / \ > / ὌΝΩΝ - 
τοῦ ἐπήλυδος γένους τὴν ἀξίωσιν ἐπὶ συναλλαγαῖς 
/ ’ / \ / we Jf > 
γάμου, δόντος Aativov τὴν θυγατέρα Aaoviviay Ai- 
- ” \ ~ 
vela γυναῖκα. ἔπειτα Kal ot ἄλλοι τὴν αὐτὴν τοῖς 
7 ~ > / / ‘ > ΨΥΝ / 
βασιλεῦσιν ἐπιθυμίαν λαβόντες καὶ δι᾽ ὀλίγου πάνυ 
~ c ΄, 
χρόνου συνενεγκάμενοι ἔθη καὶ νόμους καὶ θεῶν ἱερά, 
Ul 
κηδείας TE? συνάψαντες ἀλλήλοις καὶ κοινωνίαις 


λ ΄ ee θ / €4 ΄ “5 
πολέμων AVAKEPAGUEVTES, OL συμπαντες KOLW?) 


1 ἔσχεν ἰσχυρὰ Bb: ἰσχυρὰ Ba, ἴσχει A. 

2 re added by Kiessling. 

8 πολέμων Bb: πόλεων Ba, πόλεως A. 
198 


BOOK 1. 59, 4-60, 2 


motion of his wings. But working in opposition 
to these, a fox, after wetting his tail in the river, 
endeavoured to beat out the flames; and now those 
that were kindling it would prevail, and now the 
fox that was trying to put it out. But at last the 
two former got the upper hand, and the other went 
away, unable to do anything further. Aeneas, on 
observing this, said that the colony would become 
illustrious and an object of wonder and would gain 
the greatest renown, but that as # increased it 
would be envied by its neighbours and prove griev- 
ous to them; nevertheless, it would overcome its 
adversaries, the good fortune that it had received 
from Heaven being more powerful than the envy 
of men that would oppose it. These very clear 
indications are said to have been given of what was 
to happen to the city; of which there are monu- 
ments now standing in the forum of the Lavinians, 
in the form of bronze images of the animals, which 
have been preserved for a very long time. 

LX. After the Trojans’ city was built all were 
extremely desirous of enjoying the mutual benefit 
of their new alliance. And their kings setting the 
example, united the excellence of the two races, 
the native and the foreign, by ties of marriage. 
Latinus giving his daughter Lavinia to Aeneas. 
Thereupon the rest also conceived the same desire 
as their kings; and combining in a very brief 
time their customs, laws and religious ceremonies, 
forming ties through intermarriages and becoming 
mingled together in the wars they jointly waged, 





4 of Sintenis: τε οἱ O. 5 κοινῇ Sintenis: καὶ R, om. B. 


199 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ὀνομασίᾳ προσαγορεύοντες ἑαυτοὺς ἀπὸ τοῦ βα- 
͵ ~ > / / Ὁ“ / 
σιλέως τῶν "ABopryivwy Λατίνους, οὕτω βεβαίως 
ἔμειναν ἐπὶ τοῖς συγκειμένοις ὥστ᾽ οὐδεὶς αὐτοὺς 
ΝΜ ,ὔ 3 > 152 / / 
ἔτι χρόνος ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων διέστησε. 
\ \ \ λθό “8 A 4, 

Ta μὲν δὴ συνελθόντα ἔθνη καὶ Kowwoapeva 
τοὺς βίους, ἐξ ὧν τὸ “Ῥωμαίων γένος ὥρμηται, 
πρὶν ἣν νῦν ἔχουσιν οἰκισθῆναι πόλιν, ταῦτά ἐστιν᾿ 
> A \ ~ a \ 3 / 
ABoptyives μὲν πρῶτον, ot Σικελοὺς ἐξανέστησαν 
ἐκ τούτων τῶν χωρίων, Ἕλληνες ὄντες τὸ ἀρχαῖον 
ἐκ Πελοποννήσου τῶν σὺν Οἰνώτρῳ μετενεγ- 
καμένων τὴν οἴκησιν ἐκ τῆς καλουμένης νῦν 
> / e > A / ” > ¢ 
Ἀρκαδίας, ws ἐγὼ πείθομαι: ἔπειθ᾽ ot μετ- 
αναστάντες ἐκ τῆς τότε μὲν Aipovias, νῦν δὲ 

¢ 
Θετταλίας καλουμένης, Πελασγοί: τρίτοι δὲ ot 
\ tS 4 / > > / > 
σὺν Εὐάνδρῳ παραγενηθέντες εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν ἐκ 
ΠΠαλλαντίου πόλεως - μετὰ δὲ τούτους τῶν σὺν 
A > 
“Ηρακλεῖ στρατευομένων []ελοποννησίων ᾿Επειοί 
τε καὶ Φενεᾶται, οἷς καὶ Τρωικόν τι ἐμμέμικται" 
- \ € / \ > / ~ > 
τελευταῖοι δὲ οἱ διασωθέντες σὺν Αἰνείᾳ Τρῶες ἐξ 
᾿Ιλίου τε καὶ Δαρδάνου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Τρωικῶν 
πόλεων. 
~ ” 

LXI. Ὅτι δὲ καὶ τὸ τῶν Τρώων ἔθνος ᾿ λληνι- 

\ > a 7 = > , ι 
κὸν ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα ἦν ἐκ ]]ελοποννήσου ποτὲ 
e / ” \ \ » \ / 
ὡρμημένον, εἴρηται μὲν καὶ ἄλλοις τισὶ πάλαι, 

/, \ A ‘ > ~ aya Ε Μ A 
λεχθήσεται δὲ καὶ πρὸς ἐμοῦ δι᾽ ὀλίγων. ἔχει δὲ 
ε , ‘ : ἢ - "» , ‘ 
ὁ λόγος περὶ αὐτῶν ὧδε: Ἄτλας γίνεται βασιλεὺς 

- > ~ / a 7 / » \ \ 
πρῶτος ev τῇ καλουμένῃ viv Apkadia, ᾧκει δὲ περὶ 

‘ / / 1 Μ / 
τὸ λεγόμενον Θαυμάσιον ὄρος. τούτῳ θυγατέρες 
ἦσαν ἑπτὰ αἱ νῦν ἐν οὐρανῷ κατηστερίσθαι λεγό- 
1 Glareanus: καυκάσιον Ο ; Καυκώνιον Jacoby. 


200 


BOOK I. 60, 2-61, 1 


and all calling themselves by the common name of 
Latins, after the king of the Aborigines, they ad- 
hered so firmly to their pact that no lapse of time 
has yet severed them from one another. 

The nations, therefore, which came together and 
shared in a common life and from which the Roman 
people derived their origin before the city they now 
inhabit was built, are these: first, the Aborigines, 
who drove the Sicels out of these parts and were 
originally Greeks from the Peloponnesus, the same 
who with Oenotrus removed from the country now 
called Arcadia, according to my opinion; then, 
the Pelasgians, who came from Haemonia, as it 
was then called, but now Thessaly; third, those 
who came into Italy with Evander from the city of 
Pallantium ; after them the Epeans and Pheneats, 
who were part of the Peloponnesian army com- 
manded by Hercules, with whom a Trojan element 
also was commingled ; and, last of all, the Trojans 
who had escaped with Aeneas from Ilium, Dardanus 
and the other Trojan cities. 

LXI. That the Trojans, too, were a nation as 
truly Greek as any and formerly came from the Pelo- 
ponnesus has long since been asserted by some 
authors and shall be briefly related by me also. The 
account concerning them is as follows. Atlas was the 
first king of the country now called Arcadia, and 
he lived near the mountain called Thaumasius.! He 
had seven daughters, who are said to be numbered 


1 This mountain is mentioned by Pausanias (viii. 36, 2) 
and by Stephanus of Byzantium. Cauconius, suggested by 
Jacoby, appears to be purely a conjectural name. 


201 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


= > 9 
μεναι Πλειάδες ἐπίκλησιν, ὧν μίαν μὲν ᾿Ηλέκτραν 
A = - ~ Μ 
Ζεὺς γαμεῖ καὶ γεννᾷ παῖδας ἐξ αὐτῆς “lacov καὶ 
Δάρδανον. ἤΪασος μὲν οὖν ἠίθεος μένει, Δάρδανος 

\ » 7 / , θ / 
δὲ ἄγεται γυναῖκα Χρύσην ]}]άλλαντος θυγατέρα, 
ἐξ ἧς αὐτῷ γίνονται παῖδες ᾽Ιδαῖος καὶ 4είμας. 

e 1 / \ > "A δί αλ / \ 
οὗτοιϊ τέως μὲν ἐν "Apxadia παραλαβόντες τὴν 
“A / > / ” 

τλαντος δυναστείαν ἐβασίλευον, ἔπειτα KaTa- 

λ ~ / dA \ \ "A δέ 
κλυσμοῦ γενομένου μεγάλου περὶ τὴν Φρκαδίαν 

\ \ / > 7 \ ~ / 
τὰ μὲν πεδία ἐξελιμνώθη καὶ πολλοῦ χρόνου 

-“ > » 
γεωργεῖσθαι. ἀδύνατα ἦν, οἱ δὲ ἄνθρωποι (ῴκουν 
γὰρ ἀνὰ τὰ ὄρη γλίσχρως ποριζόμενοι τὰς τροφάς) 
συμφρονήσαντες ὦ ὡς οὐχ ἱκανὴ βόσκειν ἔ ἔσται πάντας 
ἡ περιοῦσα γῆ νέμονται σφᾶς αὐτοὺς διχῇ" καὶ 
> ~ « \ > "A bu ε / ιλέ 
αὐτῶν οἵ μὲν ἐν Ἀρκαδίᾳ ὑπομένουσι βασιλέα 
« \ 
KaTtaoTnodpevor” Δείμαντα τὸν Δαρδάνου, ot δὲ 
δ ¥S / / / 4 
λοιποὶ ἀπανίστανται []ελοποννήσου στόλῳ μεγάλῳ. 
ποιούμενοι δὲ τὸν πλοῦν παρὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην εἰς τὸν 
Μέλανα καλούμενον ἀφικνοῦνται κόλπον καὶ τυγχά- 
- a 
vovow ἐν νήσῳ τινὶ τῆς Θράκης ὁρμισάμενοι, ἣν 
~ » “ » 
οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν εἴτε ἦν οἰκουμένη καὶ πρότερον εἴτ 
- > \ 
ἔρημος 3: ἡ τίθενται τοὔνομα σύνθετον ἐκ τε ἀνδρὸς 
καὶ τόπου, Σαμοθράκην: τὸ μὲν γὰρ χωρίον τῆς 
Θ / ¢ δὲ > \ / e\ ‘E ~ \ 
pakns, ὁ δὲ οἰκιστὴς Σάμων, υἱὸς “Epyod Kat 
νύμφης Κυλληνίδος “Pivns ὀνομαζομένης. ἐκεῖ δὲ 
χρόνον οὐ πολὺν διατρίψαντες, ὡς οὐκ εὐμαρὴς ἦν 
- ~ ~ > / 
ὁ βίος αὐτοῖς γῇ τε λυπρᾷ Kat θαλάττῃ ἀγρίᾳ 
μαχομένοις, ὀλίγους τινὰς ἐν τῇ νήσῳ λειπόμενοι 
> , 
ἀπανίστανται πάλιν οἱ πλείους εἰς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν 
1 οὗτοι Kiessling: οἱ (of B) τὸ ΑΒ, ot τω Bb. 
2 Reiske: στησάμενοι O. 


202 


BOOK 1. 61, 1-4 


now among the constellations under the name of 
the Pleiades; Zeus married one of these, Electra, 
and had by her two sons, [asus and Dardanus. Jasus 
remained unmarried, but Dardanus married Chrysé, 
the daughter of Pallas, by whom he had two sons, 
Idaeus and Deimas; and these, succeeding Atlas in 
the kingdom, reigned for some time in Arcadia. 
Afterwards, a great deluge occurring throughout 
Arcadia, the plains were overflowed and for a long 
time could not be tilled; and the inhabitants, 
living upon the mountains and eking out a sorry 
livelihood, decided that the land remaining would 
not be suflicient for the support of them all, and so 
divided themselves into two groups, one of which 
remained in Arcadia, after making Deimas, the 
son of Dardanus, their king, while the other left 
the Peloponnesus on board a large fleet. And 
sailing along the coast of Europe, they came to 
a gulf called Melas and chanced to land on a certain 
island of Thrace, as to which I am unable to say 
whether it was previously inhabited or not. They 
called the island Samothrace, a name compounded of 
the name of a man and the name of a place. For 
it belongs to Thrace and its first settler was Samon, 
the son of Hermes and a nymph of Cyllené, named 
Rhené. Here they remained but a short time, 
since the life proved to be no easy one for them, 
forced to contend, as they were, with both a poor 
soil and a boisterous sea; but leaving some few of 
their people in the island, the greater part of them 
removed once more and went to Asia under Dardanus 


3. ἔρημος Kiessling: ἐρήμη ἦν B, ἐρήμη R. 
203 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ΝΜ « / ~ > / / » 
ἔχοντες ἡγεμόνα τῆς ἀποικίας Δάρδανον: ἤΐασος 
γὰρ ἐν τῇ νήσῳ κεραυνῷ πληγεὶς τελευτᾷ Δήμητρος 
εὐνῆς ' ὀριγνώμενος 5: ποιησάμενοί τε τὴν ἀπό- 
΄ ~ «ς 
βασιν ἐν τῷ καλουμένῳ νῦν ᾿Ελλησπόντῳ περὶ τὴν 
Ὁ A ϑ,ῖ Ss / > ~ \ 
ὕστερον κληθεῖσαν οἰκίζονται Φρυγίαν, ᾽Ιδαῖος μὲν 
~ ~ , - 
6 Δαρδάνου μέρος τῆς στρατιᾶς ἔχων ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν, 
Δ ~ > - ΦῚῸ.32)ϑ»ἷ}ἷ} 63 / / ΝΜ \ ~ 
ἃ νῦν ᾿Ιδαῖα ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου λέγεται, ἔνθα μητρὶ θεῶν 
ἱερὸν ἱδρυσάμενος ὄργια καὶ τελετὰς κατεστήσατο, 
at καὶ εἰς τόδε χρόνου διαμένουσιν ἐν ἁπάσῃ 
Φρυγίᾳ: Adpd δ᾽ ἐν τῇ καλουμένῃ νῦν Τρωάδ 
ρυγίᾳ: Δάρδανος δ᾽ ἐν τῇ καλουμένῃ νῦν Τρωάδι 
πόλιν ὁμώνυμον αὑτῷ κατασκευάσας, δόντος αὐτῷ 
\ ,ὔ / / > 3 ἫΝ \ \ 
τὰ χωρία Τεύκρου βασιλέως, ἀφ᾽ οὗ Tevxpis τὸ 
> an ¢e ~ > / ~ \ Μ Α 
ἀρχαῖον ἡ γῆ ἐλέγετο. τοῦτον δὲ ἄλλοι τε πολλοὶ 
\ / ¢ \ > \ / > / 
καὶ Φανόδημος ὁ τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν γράψας ἀρχαιολογίαν 
ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς μετοικῆσαί φασιν εἰς τὴν Aciav 
δήμου Ξυπεταιέως ὃ ἄρχοντα καὶ πολλὰ παρέχονται 
~ / ~ 
τοῦ λόγου τεκμήρια. κρατήσαντα δὲ χώρας συχνῆς 
τε καὶ ἀγαθῆς καὶ οὐ πολὺ τὸ ἐπιχώριον ἐχούσης 
γένος ἀσμένως τὸν Δάρδανον ἰδεῖν καὶ τὸ σὺν αὐτῷ 
παραγενόμενον ᾿Ελληνικόν, τῶν τε πρὸς τοὺς βαρ- 
,ὔ . δ: ΜῈ ς ~ \ 
βάρους πολέμων συμμαχίας ἕνεκα καὶ Wa ἢ γῆ μὴ 
> 
ἦ ἔρημος. 


1 εὐνῆς Bb: εὐνὴν ABa. 

2 After ὀριγνώμενος B has ὡς of ἔχει, deleted by ΒΡ, R have 
ὡς of ἔχειν. Kiessling read ὡς ὁ λόγος ἔχει, Grasberger εὐνὴν 
ὀριγνώμενος αἰσχύνειν. 

8 Ξυπεταιέως Sylburg: ἐξυπεταιέως Β, ἐξυπταιέως A. But 
the form Suzeraevs is questionable, even as a noun; else- 
where the word for an inhabitant of the deme Suzérn (also 
spelled Zumeréa or Zumeraia) is Ξυπεταιών. The normal con- 
struction with δήμου would be Suzeraovwy (cf. δήμου Τρώων 


204 


BOOK I. 61, 4-5 


as leader of their colony (for Iasus had died in the 
island, being struck with a thunderbolt for desiring 
to have intercourse with Demeter), and disembark- 
ing in the strait now called the Hellespont, they 
settled in the region which was afterwards called 
Phrygia. Idaeus, the son of Dardanus, with part 
of the company occupied the mountains which are 
now called after him the Idaean mountains, and there 
built a temple to the Mother of the Gods and in- 
stituted mysteries and ceremonies which are ob- 
served to this day throughout all Phrygia. And 
Dardanus built a city named after himself in the 
region now called the Troad; the land was given 
to him by Teucer, the king, after whom the country 
was anciently called Teucris. Many authors, and 
particularly Phanodemus, who wrote about the 
ancient lore of Attica,’ say that Teucer had come 
into Asia from Attica, where he had been chief of 
the deme called Xypeté, and of this tale they offer 
many proofs. They add that, having possessed 
himself of a large and fertile country with but a 
small native population, he was glad to see Dardanus 
and the Greeks who came with him, both because 
he hoped for their assistance in his wars against the 
barbarians and because he desired that the land 
should not remain unoccupied. 


1 His work was an Aithis (cf. p. 27, τι. 1). Miller, Frag. 
Hist. Graec. i. 367, 8). 


in the parallel passage in Strabo xiii. 1, 78); other possible 
readings are Suzeraivos, if this form can be used as an 
adjective, and Zuzeraias. 


205 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


LXII. Azarre? δὲ ὁ λόγος Kai τὸν Αἰνείαν ἐξ 
o om” , , \ \ a , 
ὧν ἔφυ διηγήσασθαι: βραχείᾳ δὴ καὶ τοῦτο δηλώσει 
σημανῶ. Δάρδανος ἐπειδὴ Χρύσην τὴν Πάλλαντος 
θυγατέρα, ἐξ ἧς οἱ πρότεροι παῖδες ἐγένοντο αὐτῷ, 
τελευτῆσαι συνέπεσε, Βάτειαν γαμεῖ τὴν Τεύκρου 
θυγατέρα: καὶ γίνεται παῖς αὐτῷ ᾿Εριχθόνιος, ὃς 
ἁπάντων ἀνθρώπων εὐδαιμονέστατος λέγεται γε- 
νέσθαι τῆς τε πατρῴας καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ τῷ μητροπά- 
τορι γενομένης κληρονομήσας. ἀρχῆς. Ἐριχθονίου 
δὲ καὶ t Καλλιρρόης " τῆς “Σκαμάνδρου γίνεται Τρώς, 
ad’ οὗ τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν τὸ ἔθνος ἔχει" Τρωὸς δὲ καὶ 
“καλλαρίδος τῆς Εὐμήδους ᾿Ασσάρακος ἦν: τού- 
του δὲ καὶ Κλυτοδώρας τῆς Aaopédovtos Κάπυς" 
Κάπυος δὲ καὶ νύμφης Ναϊάδος “]ερομνήμης 5 
Ayyions: Ἀγχίσου δὲ καὶ Adpodityns Αἰνείας. 
ε \ \ \ \ ‘ / « \ > 
ws μὲν δὴ καὶ τὸ Τρωικὸν γένος ᾿λληνικὸν ap- 
χῆθεν ἦν δεδήλωταί μοι. 

ΠΧΠ1. Περὶ δὲ τῶν χρόνων ἐν οἷς ἐκτίσθη τὸ 

oh " \ ", ΄ > \ , 

“αουΐνιον ἄλλοι μὲν ἄλλως λέγουσιν - ἐμοὶ μέντοι 
δοκοῦσιν οἱ δευτέρῳ μετὰ τὴν ἔξοδον τὴν ἐκ Τροίας 
” / Ε \ 3 > / GAA λέ AyD 
ἔτει φέροντες αὐτὴν ὃ εἰκότα μᾶλλον λέγειν. ιος 
μὲν γὰρ ἑάλω τελευτῶντος ἤδη τοῦ ἔαρος," ἑπτακαί- 
δεκα πρότερον ἡμέραις τῆς θερινῆς τροπῆς, ὀγδόῃ 
φθίνοντος μηνὸς Θαργηλιῶνος, ὡς ᾿Αθηναῖοι τοὺς 
1 Jacoby: καλλιρόης Ο. - Kiessling : εἰρομένης AB. 


8 ἔτει φέροντες αὐτὴν O: ἐπιφέροντες ἐνιαυτῷ Madvig. 
4 ἔαρος Camerarius: θέρους Ο, Jacoby. 
ρ p 





1 This would be 1181 B.c. according to Dionysius, since 
Eratosthenes, whose chronology he follows (chap. 74, 2), 
placed the fall of Troy in 1183. 


206 


BOOK 1. 62, 1-63, 1 


LXII. But the subject requires that I relate also 
how Aeneas was descended: this. too, I shall do 
briefly. Dardanus, after the death of Chrysé, the 
daughter of Pallas, by whom he had his first sons, 
married Bateia, the daughter of Teucer, and by her 
had Erichthonius, who is said to have been the most 
fortunate of all men, since he inherited both the 
kingdom of his father and that of his maternal 
grandfather. Of Erichthonius and Callirrhoé, the 
daughter of Scamander, was born Tros, from whom 
the nation has received its name ; of Tros and Acal- 
laris, the daughter of Eumedes, Assaracus; of Assa- 
racus and Clytodora, the daughter of Laomedon, 
Capys; of Capys and a Naiad nymph, Hiero- 
mnemé, Anchises; of Anchises and Aphrodité, 
Aeneas. Thus 1 have shown that the Trojan race, 
too, was originally Greek. 

LXIII. Concerning the time when Lavinium was 
built there are various reports, but to me the most 
probable seems to be that which places it in the 
second year after the departure of the Trojans from 
Troy.1 For Ilium was taken at the end of the spring, 
seventeen days before the summer solstice, and the 
eighth from the end of the month Thargelion,? 
according to the calendar of the Athenians; and 


2 The Athenians divided their months into three periods 
of ten days each (nine in the last period in the shorter 
months), in the first two of which they counted the days 
forwards, as we do, while in the third they reckoned 
backwards from the end of the month. The eighth 
from the end of the month, reckoning inclusively, would be 
the 23rd (or 22nd). Their year seems to have begun with 
the new moon immediately following the summer solstice. 


207 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


χρόνους ἄγουσι, περιτταὶ δὲ ἦσαν at τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν 
ἐκεῖνον ἐκπληροῦσαι μετὰ τὴν τροπὴν εἴκοσιν ἡμέ- 
pat. ἐν δὴ ταῖς ἑπτὰ καὶ τριάκοντα ταῖς ἀπὸ τῆς 
ἁλώσεως διαγενομέναις τά τε περὶ τὴν πόλιν οἴομαι 
διοικήσασθαι τοὺς ᾿Αχαιοὺς καὶ τὰς πρεσβείας ἐπι- 
δέξασθαι τὰς παρὰ τῶν ἀφεστηκότων καὶ τὰ ὅρκια 
ποιήσασθαι πρὸς αὐτούς. τῷ δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἔτει, πρώτῳ 
δὲ μετὰ τὴν ἅλωσιν. ὑπὸ τὴν μετοπωρινὴν ἰσημερίαν 
ἄραντες οἱ Τρῶες ἐκ τῆς γῆς περαιοῦνται τὸν 
“Ελλήσποντον καὶ καταχθέντες εἰς τὴν Θράκην 
αὐτοῦ διατρίβουσι τὴν χειμερινὴν ὥραν δεχόμενοί 
τε τοὺς ἐπισυνιόντας ἐκ τῆς φυγῆς καὶ παρα- 
σκευαζόμενοι τὰ εἰς τὸν ἀπόπλουν. ἐκ δὲ τῆς 
Θράκης ἀναστάντες ἔαρος ἀρχομένου τελοῦσι τὸν 
μεταξὺ πλοῦν ἄχρι Σικελίας - ἐκεῖ δὲ ὁρμισαμένοις 
αὐτοῖς τὸ ἔτος τοῦτο τελευτᾷ, καὶ διατρίβουσι τὸν 
δεύτερον χειμῶνα τὰς πόλεις συνοικίζοντες τοῖς 
᾿Ελύμοις ἐν Σικελίᾳ. πλοἵμων δὲ γενομένων 
ἄραντες ἀπὸ τῆς νήσου περῶσι τὸ Τυρρηνικὸν 
πέλαγος καὶ τελευτῶντες εἰς Λαύρεντον ἀφικνοῦνται 
τὸν Αβοριγίνων αἰγιαλὸν μεσούσης θερείας. λα- 
βόντες δὲ τὸ χωρίον οἰκίζουσιν ἐν αὐτῷ Aaovinov 
τὸν δεύτερον ἀπὸ τῆς ἁλώσεως ἐκπληρώσαντες 
ἐνιαυτόν. καὶ περὶ μὲν τούτων ὡς ἔχω δόξης 
δεδήλωταί μοι. 

LXIV. Αἰνείας δὲ κατασκευάσας ἱεροῖς τε καὶ 
τοῖς ἄλλοις κόσμοις ἀποχρώντως τὴν πόλιν, ὧν τὰ 
πλεῖστα ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ ἦν, τῷ μὲν ἑξῆς ἐνιαυτῷ, 





1Cf. Livy i. 2. From this point onward parallel pas- 
sages in Livy will be thus indicated by a note attached 


208 


BOOK I. 63, 1-64, 1 


there still remained twenty days after the solstice 
to complete that year. During the thirty-seven 
days that followed the taking of the city I imagine 
the Achaeans were employed in regulating the affairs 
of the city, in receiving embassies from those who 
had withdrawn themselves, and in concluding a 
treaty with them. In the following year, which was 
the first after the taking of the city, the Trojans 
set sail about the autumnal equinox, crossed the 
Hellespont, and landing in Thrace, passed the winter 
season there, during which they received the fugi- 
tives who kept flocking to them and made the neces- 
sary preparations for their voyage. And leaving 
Thrace in the beginning of spring, they sailed as far 
as Sicily; when they had landed there that year 
came to an end, and they passed the second winter 
in assisting the Elymians to found their cities in 
Sicily. But as soon as conditions were favourable 
for navigation they set sail from the island, and 
crossing the Tyrrhenian sea, arrived at last at 
Laurentum on the coast of the Aborigines in the 
middle of the summer. And having received the 
ground from them, they founded Lavinium, thus 
bringing to an end the second year from the taking 
of Troy. With regard to these matters, then, I have 
thus shown my opinion. 

LXIV. But! when Aeneas had sufficiently adorned 
the city with temples and other public buildings, of 
which the greatest part remained even to my day, 
to the initial word of a chapter or series of chapters in 
Dionysius. 

209 
VOL. 1. I 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ ~ 
τρίτῳ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ἐξόδου, Τρώων ἐβασίλευσε 
μόνων: τῷ δὲ τετάρτῳ τελευτήσαντος “ατίνου 
καὶ τὴν ἐκείνου βασιλείαν παραλαμβάνει τῆς τε 
/ ~ ~ 
κηδείας οἰκειότητι τῆς πρὸς αὐτόν, ἐπικλήρου THs 
Aaovivias γενομένης μετὰ τὸν Aativov θάνατον, καὶ 
τοῦ πρὸς τοὺς ἀστυγείτονας πολέμου τῆς στρατη- 
γίας ἕνεκα. ἀπέστησαν γὰρ αὖθις ἀπὸ τοῦ “ατί- 
e / / 6 / ~ > / 
νου “Ῥότολοι λαβόντες ἡγεμόνα τῶν αὐτομόλων 
A ~ A / \ "A / 1 > \ a” 
τινὰ τῆς Aativov γυναικὸς Apdaras} ἀνεψιὸν ὄνομα 
Tuppnvov.2 ὁ δὲ ἀνὴρ οὗτος ἐπὶ τῷ γάμῳ τῆς 
Aaovivias τὸν κηδεστὴν μεμφόμενος, ὅτι παρελθὼν 
A ~ 9 
τὸ συγγενὲς ὀθνείοις ὥ ἐκήδευσε, τῆς τε ᾿Αμάτας 
᾽ὔ κ Ε ~ vA 
mapofvvovens καὶ ἄλλων τινῶν συλλαμβανόντων, 
\ e > - 
ἄγων τὴν δύναμιν ἧς αὐτὸς ἦρχε προστίθεται τοῖς 
¢ / / ay ~ > / / 
οτόλοις. πολέμου δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἐγκλημάτων τούτων 
~ ~ > 
γενομένου καὶ μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς “ατῖνός τε ἀπο- 
~ / 
θνήσκει καὶ Tuppnvos καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ovyxvot, 
~ > a ξ \ > / > \ / 
κρατοῦσι δ᾽ ὅμως ot σὺν Αἰνείᾳ. ἐκ δὲ τούτου 
~ ~ > \ 
τὴν ὑπὸ τῷ κηδεστῇ γενομένην ἀρχὴν Αἰνείας 
/, / \ ΄ Μ A A 
παραλαμβάνει. τρία δὲ βασιλεύσας ἔτη μετὰ τὴν 
~ \ / 
Aativov τελευτὴν τῷ τετάρτῳ θνήσκει κατὰ πόλε- 
«ς / / νι > ΞΡ / 7 
μον. ἱΡότολοί te yap ἐκ τῶν πόλεων στρατεύουσιν 


1°Audtas Cobet, ᾿Αμάτης Steph.: ἀμίτας O, Jacoby (and 
so just below). 

2 τυρρηνόν O (and similarly below): Τυρνόν Sylburg, Cobet. 

3 ὀθνείοις B: ὀθνείους R. 





1 Τῦ is perhaps wiser to follow the MSS. in the spelling of 
this name than to emend to Turnus. Granted that Tupvos 
might easily have been changed to Τυρρηνός by a scribe, 
yet it is just as conceivable that Greek writers, seeing in 


210 


BOOK I. 64, 1-4 


the next year, which was the third after his de- 
parture from Troy, he reigned over the Trojans only. 
But in the fourth year, Latinus having died, he 
succeeded to his kingdom also, not only in considera- 
tion of his relationship to him by marriage, Lavinia 
being the heiress after the death of Latinus, but also 
because of his being commander in the war against 
the neighbouring tribes. For the Rutulians had 
again revolted from Latinus, choosing for their 
leader one of the deserters, named Tyrrhenus,’ who 
was a nephew of Amata,? the wife of Latinus. This 
man, blaming Latinus in the matter of Lavinia’s 
marriage, because he had ignored his kinsmen and 
allied his family with outsiders, and being goaded on 
by Amata and encouraged by others, had gone over to 
the Rutulians with the forces he commanded. War 
arose out of these complaints and in a sharp battle 
that ensued Latinus, Tyrrhenus and many others 
were slain; nevertheless, Aeneas and his people 
gained the victory. Thereupon Aeneas succeeded to 
the kingdom of his father-in-law ; but when he had 
reigned three years after the death of Latinus, in 
the fourth he lost his life in battle. For the Rutulians 
marched out in full force from their cities against 


Turnus nothing but a modified form of Tyrrhenus, may 
have preferred to use the normal form; we have already 
met with a Tyrrhenus as the eponymous founder of the 
Tyrrhenian race (chaps. 27 f.). Yet for Turnus Herdonius 
(iv. 45, 47 f.) Dionysius evidently used the spelling Τύρνος 
(corrupted to Τύρδος in the MSS.). 

2JIn the case of this name we may emend to Amata 
with little hesitation, since the form Amita (‘ paternal 
aunt ’’) is not appropriate as a proper name and is unlike 
any Greek name. 


211 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


σ Dy b] / \ \ b] ~ \ 
ἅπαντες ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς βασιλεὺς Tuppn- 
νῶν Μεσέντιος δείσας περὶ τῆς αὑτοῦ χώρας ἤδη 
γὰρ ἐπὶ μέγα χωροῦσαν τὴν ᾿Βλληνικὴν ὁρῶν 
δύναμιν ἤχθετο. μάχης δὲ γενομένης καρτερᾶς οὐ 
πρόσω τοῦ Aaoviviov καὶ πολλῶν ἑκατέρωθεν ἀπο- 
λομένων τὰ μὲν στρατεύματα νυκτὸς ἐπελθούσης 
διελύθη, τὸ δὲ Αἰνείου σῶμα φανερὸν οὐδαμῇ γενό- 
os A > \ μ Ρ ” a > 
μενον οἱ μὲν εἰς θεοὺς μεταστῆναι εἴκαζον, ot δ᾽ ἐν 
~ ~ 2 A ε / > / ~ 
τῷ ποταμῷ, Tap ov ἡ μέχη ἐγένετο, διαφθαρῆναι. 
\ ~ / ς a ε ~ > 
Kal αὐτῷ κατασκευάζουσιν ot Aartivor ἡρῷον ém- 


γραφῇ τοιᾷδε κοσμούμενον: ““]Π]}ατρὸς θεοῦ 

χθονίου, ὃς ποταμοῦ Νομικίου ῥεῦμα 
/ 33 2. 4 > a / 8.. 3 τ / 

διέπει.᾽ εἰσὶ δ᾽ ot λέγουσιν én’ Ayyion κατα- 


~ > \ e > > / > ~ / 
σκευασθῆναι αὐτὸ ὑπ᾽ Αἰνείου, ἐνιαυτῷ πρότερον 
τοῦ πολέμου τούτου τελευτήσαντι. ἔστι δὲ χωμά- 
τιον οὐ μέγα καὶ περὶ αὐτὸ δένδρα στοιχηδὸν 

πεφυκότα θέας ἀξια. 
> 

LXV. Αἰνείου δ᾽ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων μεταστάντος 

¢ / / ἡ \ \ > / σ 
ἑβδόμῳ μάλιστα ἔτει μετὰ τὴν ᾿ἰΪλίου ἅλωσιν 
> / aN \ A / ¢ / ¢ 
Εὐρυλέων παρέλαβε τὴν Aatiwy ἡγεμονίαν ὁ 
/ > ~ ~ 53 \ 
μετονομασθεὶς Ἀσκάνιος ἐν τῇ φυγῇ. ἦσαν δὲ 
~ ~ / \ A 
τειχήρεις οἱ Τρῶες ἐν TH χρόνῳ τούτῳ, Kal τοῖς 
¢ lon 
μὲν πολεμίοις ἀεὶ προσήει δύναμις, αἱ δὲ τῶν 

> aA a « JV 

Λατίνων ἀδύνατοι ἦσαν τοῖς ἐν τῷ Aaoviviw πολι- 
~ \ \ \ ~ 5 
ορκουμένοις ἐπικουρεῖν. τὸ μὲν δὴ πρῶτον εἰς 
/ ~ A 
φιλίαν τε καὶ συνθήκας μετρίας προὐκαλοῦντο τοὺς 
/ € \ Α "A / ᾿ ε δ᾽ δὲ 
πολεμίους ot περὶ τὸν AcKaviov: ὡς οὐδὲν 

A ~ > , > / 
προσεῖχον αὐτοῖς, ἐπιτρέπειν ἐκείνοις ἠναγκάζοντο 
/ ‘ / 77? τ vn“ > \ 
καταλύσασθαι τὸν πόλεμον ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἂν avTotl 


212 


BOOK I. 64, 4-65, 2 


him, and with them Mezentius, king of the Tyr- 
rhenians, who thought his own country in danger ; 
for he was troubled at seeing the Greek power al- 
ready making rapid headway. ἃ severe battle 
took place not far from Lavinium and many were 
slain on both sides, but when night came on the 
armies separated; and when the body of Aeneas 
was nowhere to be seen, some concluded that it had 
been transiated to the gods and others that it had 
perished in the river beside which the battle was 
fought. And the Latins built a hero-shrine to him 
with this inscription: “To the father and god of 
this place,! who presides over the waters of the river 
Numicius.”” But there are some who say the shrine 
was erected by Aeneas in honour of Anchises, who 
died in the year before this war. It is a small 
mound, round which have been set out in regular 
rows trees that are well worth seeing. 

LXV. Aeneas having departed this life about the 
seventh year after the taking of Troy, Euryleon, who 
in the flight had been renamed Ascanius, succeeded 
to the rule over the Latins. At this time the 
Trojans were undergoing a siege; the forces of 
the enemy were increasing daily, and the Latins 
were unable to assist those who were shut up in 
Lavinium. Ascanius and his men, therefore, first 
invited the enemy to a friendly and reasonable 
accommodation, but when no heed was paid to 
them, they were forced to allow their enemies to 
put an end to the war upon their own terms. When, 


1 Dionysius evidently uses χθόνιος here to translate the 
Latin term indiges. Livy (i. 2, 6) does not specifically cite 
the inscription, but says Iovem Indigitem appellant. 


213 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> - - ~ ~ 
δικαιῶσι. τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως τῶν Τυρρηνῶν τά 
»Μ ε / > / > / 
τε ἄλλα ὡς δεδουλωμένοις ἀφόρητα ἐπιτάσσοντος 
καὶ τὸν οἶνον ὅσον ἂν ἡ Λατίνων γῆ φέρῃ Τυρρη- 
νοῖς ἀπάγειν ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος, οὐκ ἀνασχετὸν ἡγησά- 
μενοι τὸ πρᾶγμα τῆς μὲν ἀμπέλου τὸν καρπὸν ἱερὸν 
> ~ 
ἐψηφίσαντο τοῦ Διὸς εἶναι γνώμην ἀγορεύσαντος 
> / b) \ \ > / / 
Acxaviov, αὐτοὶ δὲ ἀλλήλοις παρακελευσάμενοι 
προθύμοις ἀγωνισταῖς γενέσθαι καὶ θεοὺς αἰτησά- 
μενοι συλλαβέσθαι τοῦ κινδυνεύματος ἐξῆλθον ἐκ 
΄- / / / > / 3 \ 
τῆς πόλεως φυλάξαντες νύκτα ἀσέληνον. εὐθὺς 
δὲ προσβαλόντες τῷ χάρακι τῶν πολεμίων, ὃς 
~ ΕΙΣ > 
ἐγγυτάτω τῆς πόλεως ἔκειτο Kal ἦν προτείχισμα 
= > ° ~ 
τῆς ἄλλης δυνάμεως ἐν ἐρυμνῷ τε κατεσκευασμένος 
χωρίῳ καὶ τὴν κρατίστην νεότητα Τυρρηνῶν ἔχων, 
- ΄- “A ~ + 
ἧς ἡγεῖτο Mecevtiov παῖς Aatcos ὄνομα, οὐδενὸς 
“- , ε ~ ~ 
προϊδομένου τὴν ἔφοδον αἱροῦσιν εὐπετῶς TO ὀχύ- 
1:3 ~ e ~ 
ρωμα. ἐν ᾧ δὲ TO χωρίον τοῦτο ἡλίσκετο, φῶς τε 
= ε > A > 
ἄκαιρον ὁρῶντες οἱ ἐν τοῖς πεδίοις ἐστρατοπεδευ- 
΄ / > » ” 
κότες Kal βοὴν τῶν ἀπολλυμένων ἀκούοντες ἔφευγον 
\ / Ψ ἃ \ ΝΜ > 
ἐκλιπόιτες τοὺς πεδινοὺς τόπους ἐπὶ τὰ OPH. ἐν 
δὲ τού λλὴ ἐγένετο ταραχὴ καὶ θόρυβος, οἷα 
ἐ τούτῳ πολλὴ ἐγένετο ταραχὴ καὶ θόρυβος, 
/ ~ » ~ 
ἐν νυκτὶ κινουμένης στρατιᾶς, ὡς αὐτίκα μάλα τῶν 
A 
πολεμίων σφίσιν ἐπιθησομένων od σὺν κόσμῳ οὐδὲ 
‘ / \ ” / 1 ε ὃ A A ~ 
κατὰ τέλη τὴν ἔλασιν ποιουμένοις ᾿ - οἱ δὲ Λατῖνοι, 
> 7 \ 
ἐπειδὴ TO Te φρούριον ἐξ ἐφόδου κατειλήφεσαν Kat 
/ > / 
τὸ ἄλλο στράτευμα ἔμαθον τεταραγμένον, ἐπέκειντο 
- ~ > > “ 
αὐτοῖς κτείνοντες καὶ διώκοντες. τῶν δ᾽ οὐχ ὅπως 


1 «τὴν» ἔλασιν (ποιουμένοις) Meutzner, ἐλαύνουσιν Kayser: 
ἔλασιι A. ἕλωσιν Ba, ἐλάσειν Bb. 


214 


BOOK I. 65, 2-4 


however, the king of the Tyrrhenians, among other 
intolerable conditions that he imposed upon them, 
as upon a people already become his slaves, com- 
manded them to bring to the Tyrrhenians every 
year all the wine the country of the Latins produced, 
they looked upon this as a thing beyond all endurance, 
and following the advice of Ascanius, voted that the 
fruit of the vine should be sacred to Jupiter. Then, 
exhorting one another to prove their zeal and valour 
and praying the gods to assist them in their danger- 
ous enterprise, they fixed upon a moonless night 
and sallied out of the city. And they immediately 
attacked that part of the enemy’s rampart which 
lay nearest to the city and which, being designed 
as an advanced post to cover the rest of their forces, 
had been constructed in a strong position and was 
defended by the choicest youth of the Tyrrhenians, 
under the command of Lausus, the son of Mezentius ; 
and their attack being unforeseen, they easily made 
themselves masters of the stronghold. While they 
were employed in taking this post, those of the 
enemy who were encamped on the plains, seeing an 
unusual light and hearing the cries of the men who 
were perishing, left the level country and were fleeing 
to the mountains. During this time there was great 
confusion and tumult, as was but natural with an 
army moving at night ; for they expected the enemy 
would every moment fall upon them while they were 
withdrawing in disorder and with ranks broken. 
The Latins, after they had taken the fort by storm 
and learned that the rest of the army was in disorder, 
pressed after them, killing and pursuing. And not 


215 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ > A / 6 > / > > ey: 
τις πρὸς ἀλκὴν τραπέσθαι ἐπεχείρησεν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
μαθεῖν ἐν οἷς ἦσαν κακοῖς ἠδύνατο: ὑπὸ δὲ θορύ- 
βου καὶ ἀμηχανίας ot μὲν κατὰ κρημνῶν φερόμενοι 

/ ¢ > > / > / > / 
διεφθείροντο, ot δ᾽ εἰς φάραγγας ἀνεξόδους ἐμπί- 

A 5 
πτοντες ἡλίσκοντο, ot δὲ πλεῖστοι ἀγνοήσαντες 
> , om \ , “ 1 , 
ἀλλήλους ava τὸ σκότος ὅσα πολεμίους διέθεσαν, 
\ ¢ ~ >) ~ / > 7 >. ἂν 
καὶ ὁ πλεῖστος αὐτῶν φθόρος ἀλληλοκτόνος ἐγίνετο. 
/ \ \ SA δ᾽ / \ 4 
Μεσέντιος δὲ σὺν ὀλίγοις λόφον twa καταλαβών, 
~ > 
ἐπειδὴ τοῦ παιδὸς τὸν μόρον ἐπύθετο Kal ὅσος 
αὐτῷ στρατὸς διέφθαρτο ἐν οἵῳ τε χωρίῳ κατα- 
κεκλεικὼς ἑαυτὸν ἦν, ὡς ὧν παντὸς 2 ἐν ἀπορίᾳ 3 
χρήματος, ἔπεμψε κήρυκας εἰς τὸ “αουΐνιον περὶ 
/ / > / \ A / 
φιλίας διαλεξομένους, Ἀσκανίου δὲ τοῖς Λατίνοις 
/ 
ταμιεύεσθαι THY τύχην συμβουλεύοντος ἄδειαν εὑρό- 
~ 5 Φ 
μενος ἀπῆλθεν ὑπόσπονδος μεθ᾽ ὅσης εἶχε δυνάμεως 
καὶ τὸν ἀπὸ τοῦδε χρόνον ἅπαντα διαλυσάμενος τὴν 
ἔχθραν πρὸς τοὺς Λατίνους βέβαιος φίλος ἦν. 
LXVI. Τριακοστῷ δὲ ὕστερον ἔτει μετὰ τὴν 
/ ~ a A Ἷ / ε / » / \ \ 
κτίσιν τοῦ Aaoviviov πόλιν ἑτέραν οἰκίζει κατὰ TO 
/ Ai / θέ "A / ς Ae / \ 
γενόμενον Αἰνείᾳ θέσφατον Acokavios ὁ Αἰνείου καὶ 
/ / a 9 A “etd 4 A ~ LAA A / 
μετάγει τούς T ἐκ Aaoviviov ὁ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Aarti- 
>  - \ 
νων ὅσοις ἦν βουλομένοις ἄμεινον οἰκεῖν εἰς τὴν 
/ + ~ / / ” Μ 
νεόκτιστον, ὄνομα τῇ πόλει θέμενος Ἄλβαν. ἔστι 
e ~ / 
δ᾽ ἡ Ἄλβα καθ᾽ ᾿Ελλάδα γλῶσσαν Λευκή, σαφη- 
νισμοῦ δ᾽ ἕνεκα διορίζεται map ἑτέραν πόλιν 
¢ / > / \ ~ > 4, 5 
ὁμώνυμον ἐπικλήσει TO σχῆμα ἐπικατηγορούσῃ, 
1 οἷς ἦσαν κακοῖς Bb: οἷς ἦν κακοῖς Ba, οἷς κακοῖς ἦν A. 
2 ὡς ὧν παντὸς Capps, παντὸς Kiessling, ὡς ὧν Jacoby : ὡς O. 
3 ἐν ἀπορίᾳ Steph.: ἐν ἀπόρω AB. 
ὁ πόλιν. . . Aaoviviov Bmg: om. ABa. 
5 ἐπικατηγορούσῃ L. Dindorf: ἐπικατηγορήσει AB. 


216 


BOOK 1. 65, 4-66. 1 


only did none of the enemy attempt to turn and 
resist, but it was not even possible for them to 
know in what evil plight they were, and in their 
confusion and helplessness some were falling over 
precipices and perishing, while others were becoming 
entangled in blind ravines and were being taken 
prisoner ; but most of them, failing to recognize their 
comrades in the dark, treated them as enemies, and 
the greatest part of their loss was due to their slaying 
of one another. Mezentius with a few of his men 
seized a hill, but when he learned of the fate of his 
son and of the numbers he had lost and discovered the 
nature of the place in which he had shut himself up, 
realizing that he was lacking in everything needful, 
he sent heralds to Lavinium to treat for peace. And 
since Ascanius advised the Latins to husband their 
good fortune, Mezentius obtained permission to re- 
tire under a truce with the forces he had left; and 
from that time, laying aside all his enmity with the 
Latins, he was their constant friend. 

LXVI. In the thirtieth year! after the founding 
of Lavinium Ascanius, the son of Aeneas, in pur- 
suance of the oracle given to his father, built an- 
other city and transferred both the inhabitants of 
Lavinium and the other Latins who were desirous 
of a better habitation to this newly-built city, which 
he calied Alba. Alba means in the Greek tongue 
Leuké or *“* White”’?; but for the sake of clearness 
it is distinguished from another city of the same name 
by the addition of an epithet descriptive of its shape, 


1 Cf. Livy i. 3, 3-4. According to Dionysius’ reckoning 
(see p. 206, n. 1), Alba was founded in 1151 B.c. 


217 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δ 9 σ 4 »Μ »᾿ > > ~ 

Kal ἐστιν ὥσπερ σύνθετον ἤδη τοὔνομα ἐξ ἀμφοῖν 
~ > ~ 
"AXBa Adyya, τοῦτο δ᾽ ἔστι Λευκὴ μακρά. νῦν 

A > ” / > > \ \ ‘O / / 
μὲν οὖν ἔρημός ἐστιν: ἐπὶ yap ᾿Οστιλίου Τύλλου 
ν / r / / ὃ / \ Ἁ 

ὠμαίων βασιλέως στασιάζειν δόξασα πρὸς τὴν 

~ > ~ ~ 
ἀποικίαν περὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς ἀνῃρέθη: τὸ δ᾽ ἐν αὐτῇ 
πολιτευόμενον πλῆθος ἡ καθελοῦσα τὴν μητρόπολιν 
e / « / > \ ~ \ > - ες 
ὑπεδέξατο “Ῥώμη. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἐν τοῖς ἱκνου- 

¢ 
μένοις χρόνοις ἐγένετο, ἡνίκα δὲ φκίζετο πρὸς ὄρει 
καὶ λίμνῃ κατεσκευάσθη τὸ μέσον ἐπέχουσα ἀμφοῖν, 
καὶ ἦν ὥσπερ τείχη τῆς πόλεως ταῦτα δυσάλωτον 
αὐτὴν ποιοῦντα. τό τε γὰρ ὄρος ἐν τοῖς πάνυ 
> / Α ε / a / > σ / 6 ~ A 
ὀχυρόν Te Kal ὑψηλόν ἐστιν 7 τε λίμνη βαθεῖα Kat 
μεγάλη, καὶ αὐτὴν διὰ κλισιάδων ἀνοιγομένων ὗπο- 
δέχεται τὸ πεδίον ταμιευομένων ὁπόσον βούλονται 
~ > 4 \ Ὁ“ ες / \ ~ / 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων τὸ ὕδωρ. ὑπόκειται δὲ TH πόλει 
/ \ \ > - / \ \ ΝΜ 

πεδία θαυμαστὰ μὲν ἰδεῖν, πλούσια δὲ καὶ οἴνους 

> ~ 
καὶ Kaptovs! ἐξενεγκεῖν παντοδαποὺς καὶ οὐδὲν 
> / ~ »~ 3 / / \ 4 
ἐνδεεστέρους τῆς ἄλλης ᾿Ιταλίας, μάλιστα δὲ τὸν 
καλούμενον ᾿Αλβανὸν οἶνον ἡδὺν καὶ καλόν, ἔξω 

΄ / / ~ ~ ΝΜ ε 
τοῦ Φαλερίνου λεγομένου τῶν γοῦν ἄλλων ἁπάντων 
διαφορώτατον. 

LXVII. Ἔν δὲ τῇ κτίσει τῆς πόλεως θαῦμα 
μέγιστον λέγεται γενέσθαι. κατασκευασθέντος τοῖς 
“ ~ ~ Δ >? / > ~ / Des SF. 
ἕδεσι τῶν θεῶν, ods Αἰνείας ἐκ τῆς Τρωάδος ἠνέγ- 

~ - ~ / 
Kato Kal καθίδρυσεν ἐν τῷ Aaoviviw, ναοῦ χωρίον 
~ > ~ a ἢ 
ἔχοντος ἄβατον καὶ τῶν ἱδρυμάτων ἐκ τοῦ Aaoviviov 
6 ~ \ 
μετακομισθέντων 5 εἰς τοῦτον τὸν μυχόν, ὑπὸ τὴν 
1 καὶ οἴνους καὶ καρποὺς Jacoby: καὶ οἴνους ABa, καὶ καρ- 


ποὺς Bmg. 


218 


BOOK I. 66, 1-67, 1 


and its name is now, as it were, a compound, made 
up of the two terms, Alba Longa, that is Leuké 
Makra or “ Long White (town). This city is now 
uninhabited, since in the time of Tullus Hostilius, 
king of the Romans, Alba seemed to be contending 
with her colony for the sovereignty and hence 
was destroyed; but Rome, though she razed her 
mother-city to the ground, nevertheless welcomed 
its citizens into her midst. But these events belong 
to alater time. To return to its founding, Alba was 
built near a mountain and a lake, occupying the 
space between the two, which served the city in 
place of walls and rendered it difficult to be taken. 
For the mountain is extremely strong and high and 
the lake is deep and large; and its waters are re- 
ceived by the plain when the sluices are opened, the 
inhabitants having it in their power to husband the 
supply as much as they wish. Lying below the city 
are plains marvellous to behold and rich in pro- 
ducing wines and fruits of all sorts in no degree 
inferior to the rest of Italy, and particularly what 
they call the Alban wine, which is sweet and excellent 
and, with the exception of the Falernian, certainly 
superior to all others. 

LXVII. While the city was building, a most 
remarkable prodigy is said to have occurred. A 
temple with an inner sanctuary had been built for the 
images of the gods which Aeneas had brought with 
him from the Troad and set up in Lavinium, and the 
statues had been removed from Lavinium to this 





* ἐκ τοῦ νεὼ (ναοῦ B) after μετακομισθέντων deleted by 
Schmitz. 


219 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἐπιοῦσαν νύκτα κεκλεισμένων τε ὡς μάλιστα τῶν 
θυρῶν καὶ οὐδὲν παθόντων οὔτε περιβόλων οὔτε 
ὀροφῶν διαμείψαντα τὰ βρέτη τὴν στάσιν ἐπὶ τῶν 
ἀρχαίων εὑρεθῆναι κείμενα βάθρων: μετακομι- 
σθέντα δὲ αὖθις ἐκ τοῦ “αουϊνίου σὺν ἱκετείαις καὶ 
θυσίαις ἀρεστηρίοις εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ χωρίον ὁμοίως 
ἀνελθεῖν. τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους τέως μὲν ἀπορεῖν 
ὅ τι χρήσονται τοῖς πράγμασιν οὔτε δίχα τῶν 
πατρῴων θεῶν οἰκεῖν ἀξιοῦντας οὔτε ἐπὶ τὴν 
ἐκλειφθεῖσαν οἴκησιν αὖθις ἀναστρέφειν, τελευ- 
τῶντας δὲ γνώμην εὑρέσθαι, ἣ ἔμελλεν ἀποχρώντως 
πρὸς ἀμφότερα ἕξειν. τὰ μὲν ἕδη κατὰ χώραν 
ἐᾶσαι μένειν, ἄνδρας δὲ τοὺς ἐπιμελησομένους 
αὐτῶν ἐκ τῆς "AABas εἰς τὸ Aaovinov αὖθις 
ἐποίκους μεταγαγεῖν. καὶ ἐγένοντο οἱ πεμφθέντες 
ἑξακόσιοι μελεδωνοὶ τῶν ἱερῶν αὐτοῖς μετανα- 
στάντες ἐφεστίοις- ἡγεμὼν δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐτάχθη 
Alyeotos. τοὺς δὲ θεοὺς τούτους “Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν 
Πενάτας καλοῦσιν: οἱ δ᾽ ἐξερμηνεύοντες εἰς τὴν 
᾿Ελλάδα γλῶσσαν τοὔνομα οἱ μὲν Ilatpdovs ἀπο- 
φαίνουσιν, οἱ δὲ Γενεθλίους, εἰσὶ δ᾽ οἱ Κτησίους, 
ἄλλοι δὲ Μυχίους, οἱ δὲ “Ερκείους. ἔοικε δὲ 
τούτων ἕκαστος ἀπόϊ τινος τῶν συμβεβηκότων 
αὐτοῖς ποιεῖσθαι τὴν ἐπίκλησιν κινδυνεύουσί τε 
πάντες ἁμωογέπως τὸ αὐτὸ λέγειν. σχήματος δὲ 
καὶ μορφῆς αὐτῶν πέρι Τίμαιος μὲν 0 συγγραφεὺς 
ὧδε ἀποφαίνει: 3 κηρύκεια σιδηρᾶ καὶ χαλκᾶ 


1Schwartz: κατά O, Jacoby. 

2 κινδυνεύουσί. . . λέγειν B: κινδυνεύουσί τε ov τὸ αὐτὸ πάντες 
ὁμωσγέπως τὸ αὐτὸ λέγειν Ἐν. 

Schwartz: ἀποφαίνεται Ο, Jacoby. 

4 κηρύκεια ABa: κηρύκια Bb, Jacoby. 


220 


BOOK I. 67, 1-4 


sanctuary ; but during the following night, although 
the doors were most carefully closed and the walls of 
the enclosure and the roof of the temple suffered no 
injury, the statues changed their station and were 
found upon their old pedestals. And after being 
brought back again from Lavinium with supplica- 
tions and propitiatory sacrifices they returned in like 
manner to the same place. Upon this the people 
were for some time in doubt what they should do, 
being unwilling either to live apart from their an- 
cestral gods or to return again to their deserted 
habitation. But at last they hit upon an expedient 
which promised to meet satisfactorily both these 
difficulties. This was to let the images remain where 
they were and to conduct men back from Alba to 
Lavinium to live there and take care of them. Those 
who were sent to Lavinium to have charge of their 
rites were six hundred in number; they removed 
thither with their entire households, and Aegestus 
was appointed their chief. As for these gods, the 
Romans call them Penates. Some who translate 
the name into the Greek language render it Patroot, 
others Genethlioi, some Ktésioi, others Mychioi, and 
still others Herkeioi.1 Each of these seems to be 
giving them their name from some one of their 
attributes, and it is probable that they are all ex- 
pressing more or less the same idea. Concerning 
their figure and appearance, Timaeus, the historian, 
makes the statement that the holy objects preserved 


1These Greek terms, all adjectives in form, mean the 
gods, respectively, (a) of the race. (δ) of the family, 
(c) of house and property, (d) of the inner house, (e) of 
the front court. 


221 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ / \ > A > - 3 4 
καὶ κέραμον Τρωικὸν εἶναι ta ἐν τοῖς ἀδύτοις 
- > oo ἐν / ¢ / / \ > A 
τοῖς ἐν Aaoviviw κείμενα ἱερά, πυθέσθαι δὲ αὐτὸς 
ταῦτα παρὰ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων. ἐγὼ δὲ ὅσα μὲν 
ὁρᾶν ἅπασιν οὐ θέμις οὔτε! παρὰ τῶν ὁρώντων 

> , - ~ 
ἀκούειν οὔτε ἀναγράφειν 5 οἴομαι δεῖν, νεμεσῶ δὲ 
καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις, ὅσοι πλείω τῶν συγχωρουμένων 
ὑπὸ νόμου ζητεῖν ἢ γινώσκειν ἀξιοῦσιν. 

LXVIII. A δὲ αὐτός τε ἰδὼν ἐπίσταμαι καὶ 
δέος οὐδὲν ἀποκωλύει με περὶ αὐτῶν γράφειν 

«ς ~ “ 
τοιάδε ἐστί: νεὼς ἐν “Ρώμῃ δείκνυται τῆς ἀγορᾶς 

Ψ / \ \ 2 £43 Κ. / 3 / 2s of 
οὐ πρόσω κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ Kapivas® φέρουσαν ἐπί- 
τομον ὁδὸν ὑπεροχῇ σκοτεινὸς ἱδρυμένος οὐ μέγας. 
λέγεται δὲ κατὰ τὴν ἐπιχώριον γλῶτταν Οὐελία * 
τὸ χωρίον. ἐν δὲ τούτῳ κεῖνται τῶν Τρωικῶν 
θεῶν εἰκόνες, ἃς ἅπασιν ὁρᾶν θέμις, ἐπιγραφὴν 
ἔχουσαι δηλοῦσαν τοὺς ΠΠ]ενάτας.5 εἰσὶ δὲ νεανίαι 

1 οὔτε Ο : οὐδὲ Sauppe. 

2 οὔτε ἀναγράφειν Reiske: οὐδ᾽ av ἐπιγράφειν O. 

8 Kapivas Steph.: καιριάνας AB. 

4 Οὐελία Cary, Οὐέλιαι Casaubon, ὑπ᾽ Οὐελίας Nibby, ὑπ᾽ 
᾽᾿Ελαίας Jacoby: ὑπ᾽ ἐλαίως A, ὑπελαίαις B. 

δ θέμις B: δέμας A. 

6 rods Ilevaras O: δέους Πενάτας Sauppe. After Πενάτας 
the MSS. have the sentence δοκοῦσι γάρ μοι τοῦ θ μήπω γράμ- 
ματος εὑρημένου τῷ ὃ δηλοῦν τὴν ἐκείνου δύναμιν οἱ παλαιοί (*‘ for 
in my opinion, the letter @ being not yet discovered, 
the ancients expressed its force by the letter 6”’), which 
Ambrosch deleted as the comment of an early scribe. He 
argues that the text of Dionysius originally read εἰκόνες 
ἅπασιν ὁρᾶν, AIX ΜΑΓΝΙΣ (Dis Magnis) ἐπιγραφὴν ἔχουσαι, 
δηλοῦσαν τοὺς Ilevaras, that the Latin words became cor- 
rupted into 4EMASZ (so in A) and 4EMI2X, and that the 
second form, taken for a variant of θέμις, inspired the 


scribe’s remark. Inserted later in the text, θέμις called for 
the addition of ds. But Ambrosch admits that this would 


222 


BOOK I. 67, 4-68, 2 


in the sanctuary at Lavinium are iron and bronze 
caducei or “‘ heralds’ wands,” and a Trojan earthen- 
ware vessel; this, he says, he himself learned from 
the inhabitants.'_ For my part, I believe that in the 
case of those things which it is not lawful for all to 
see I ought neither to hear about them from those who 
do see them nor to describe them; and I am indig- 
nant with every one else, too, who presumes to inquire 
into or to know more than what is permitted by law. 

LXVIII. But the things which I myself know by 
having seen them and concerning which no scruple 
forbids me to write are as follows. They show you 
in Rome a temple? built not far from the Forum in 
the short street that leads to the Carinae; it is a 
small shrine, and is darkened by the height of the 
adjacent buildings. The place is called in the native 
speech Velia. In this temple there are images of 
the Trojan gods which it is lawful for all to see, 
with an inscription showing them to be the Penates. 

1 Miller, Frag. Hist. Graec. i. 197, 20. For Timaeus see 
p- 19, n. 2. 

*The aedes deum Penatium in Velia (Livy xlv. 16, 5; 
Mon. Ancyr. iv. 7; Varro, de Ling. Lat. v. 54). The 
statues really represented the Dioscuri, but had long been 
identified with the Penates. Servius (on Aen. iii. 12), 
citing Varro, says that on the base of the statues was the 


inscription MAGNIS DIIS; but there was probably more 
to the inscription, including PENATIBVs. 


be the only instance in Dionysius of the citing of the 
Latin words of an inscription; he usually gives merely the 
purport. Sauppe’s δέους Πενάτας (1.6., Dis Penatibus put 
into the accusative, following δηλοῦσαν) might have been 
taken by a scribe. ignorant of Latin, as early Greek for 
θεοὺς Πενάτας. But δηλοῦσαν is hardly the verb to introduce 
the exact words of an inscription. 


223 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δύο καθήμενοι δόρατα διειληφότες, τῆς παλαιᾶς 
ἔργα τέχνης. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα ἐν ἱεροῖς ἀρχαίοις 
εἴδωλα τῶν θεῶν τούτων ἐθεασάμεθα, καὶ ἐν ἅπασι 
νεανίσκοι δύο στρατιωτικὰ σχήματα ἔχοντες φαί- 
νονται. ὁρᾶν μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἔξεστιν, ἀκούειν δὲ 
\ / ε \ > ~ “A / 4 ¢ 
καὶ γράφειν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν, ἃ KaddXlotpatds τε ὃ 
\ ~ / 
περὶ Σαμοθράκης συνταξάμενος ἱστορεῖ καὶ Σά- 
> \ 
Tupos ὁ τοὺς ἀρχαίους μύθους συναγαγὼν καὶ 
+ / / \ - ε - ” 
ἄλλοι συχνοί, παλαιότατος δὲ ὧν ἡμεῖς ἴσμεν 
\ > ~ / ~ - 4 
ποιητὴς Αρκτῖνος. λέγουσι γοῦν ὧδε: Χρύσην 
\ / / / 4 
τὴν Π]άλλαντος θυγατέρα γημαμένην Aapdavw 
Ἁ > / \ > ~ / 
depvas ἐπενέγκασθαι δωρεὰς ᾿Αθηνᾶς τά τε [1αλ- 
/ \ \ ε \ ~ / ~ ~ 
λάδια Kai τὰ ἱερὰ τῶν μεγάλων θεῶν διδαχθεῖσαν 
᾽ ~ A / > \ \ \ > / 
αὐτῶν tas τελετάς. ἐπειδὴ δὲ τὴν ἐπομβρίαν 
φεύγοντες Ἀρκάδες [Π]Ἰελοπόννησον μὲν ἐξέλιπον, 
> \ ~ / / A / « / 
ev δὲ τῇ Θρᾳκίᾳ νήσῳ τοὺς βίους ἱδρύσαντο, 
κατασκευάσαι τὸν Δάρδανον ἐνταῦθα τῶν θεῶν 
τούτων ἱερὸν ἀρρήτους τοῖς ἄλλοις ποιοῦντα τὰς 
ἰδίους αὐτῶν ὀνομασίας καὶ τὰς τελετὰς αὐτοῖς τὰς 
καὶ εἰς τόδε χρόνου γινομένας ὑπὸ Σαμοθρᾷάκων 
~ ~ ~ \ 
ἐπιτελεῖν. ws δὲ μετῆγε Tod λεὼ τὴν πλείω 
μοῖραν εἰς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν τὰ μὲν ἱερὰ τῶν θεῶν καὶ 
τὰς τελετὰς τοῖς ὑπομείνασιν ἐν τῇ νήσῳ καταλι- 
πεῖν, τὰ δὲ Π]}αλλάδια καὶ τὰς τῶν} θεῶν εἰκόνας 
> ~ 
κατασκευασάμενον ἀγαγέσθαι μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ. διαμαν- 


1 τῶν added by Reiske. 





1 Miller, Frag. Hist. Graec. iv. 355 f., 10. Domitius 
Callistratus seems to have been a Roman freedman, 


224 


BOOK I. 68, 2-4 


They are two seated youths holding spears, and 
are pieces of ancient workmanship. We have seen 
many other statues also of these gods in ancient 
temples and in all of them are represented two youths 
in military garb. ‘These it is permitted to see, and it 
is also permitted to hear and to write about them 
what Callistratus,| the author of the history of 
Samothrace, relates, and also Satyrus, who collected 
the ancient legends, and many others, too, among 
whom the poet Arctinus is the earliest we know of. 
At any rate, the following is the account they give. 
Chrysé, the daughter of Pallas, when she was married 
to Dardanus, brought for her dowry the gifts of 
Athena, that is, ne: Palladia and the sacred symbols 
of the Great Gods, in whose mysteries she had been 
instructed. When the Arcadians, fleeing from the 
deluge,” left the Peloponnesus and established their 
abode in the Thracian island,? Dardanus built there a 
temple to these gods, whose particular names he kept 
secret from all others, and performed the mysteries 
in their honour which are observed to this day by the 
Samothracians. Then, when he was conducting the 
greater part of the people into Asia, he left the sacred 
rites and mysteries of the gods with those who 
remained in the island, but packed up and carried 
with him the Palladia and the images of the gods. 
And upon consulting the oracle concerning the place 


Satyrus is unknown, but was probably not the same as 
the biographer of that name. Arctinus was regarded in 
later times as the author of two of the poems in the Epic 
Cycle, the Aethiopis and the Iliow Persis ; but classical 
writers cited the poems anonymously. 

* See chap. 61, 2. 3 Samothrace. 


225 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ \ \ ~ 9 / / » - 

τευόμενον δὲ περὶ τῆς οἰκήσεως τά τε ἄλλα μαθεῖν 
A \ ~ ε ~ ~ ~ 

καὶ περὶ TOV ἱερῶν THs φυλακῆς τόνδε τὸν χρησμὸν 


λαβεῖν" 


Εἰς πόλιν ἣν κτίζησθα: θεοῖς σέβας ἄφθιτον αἰεὶ 
θεῖναι, καὶ φυλακαῖς τε σέβειν θυσίαις τε χοροῖς τε. 

ε 5 Ἃ A] (ὃ \ I / 3 / ’ 
ἔστ᾽ " ἂν γὰρ τάδε σεμνὰ καθ᾽ ὑμετέρην χθόνα μίμνῃ 
δῶρα Διὸς κούρης ἀλόχῳ σέθεν, ἡ δὲ πόλις σοι 
ἔσται ἀπόρθητος τὸν ἀεὶ χρόνον ἤματα πάντα. 


΄ A > ~ ‘ ey? 
LXIX. Δάρδανον μὲν ἐν τῇ κτισθείσῃ τε ὑφ 
ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ὀνομασίας ὁμοίας τυχούσῃ πόλει τὰ ἕδη 

~ > / ae e / / / 
καταλιπεῖν, ᾿Ϊλίου δ᾽ ἐν ὑστέρῳ χρόνῳ συνοικισθέν- 
τος ἐκεῖ μετενεχθῆναι πρὸς τῶν ἐγγόνων αὐτοῦ 
τὰ ἱερά. ποιήσασθαι δὲ τοὺς ᾿Ϊλιεῖς νεών τε καὶ 
»᾿ » - > \ ~ Μ \ / > 
ἄδυτον αὐτοῖς ἐπὶ τῆς ἄκρας καὶ φυλάττειν δι 
5 λ / σ΄ 5 ὃ / λ / θ / / 
ἐπιμελείας ὅσης ὃ ἐδύναντο πλείστης θεόπεμπτά TE 
ἡγουμένους εἶναι καὶ σωτηρίας κύρια τῇ πόλει. 
ἁλισκομένης δὲ τῆς κάτω πόλεως τὸν Αἰνείαν 
καρτερὸν τῆς ἄκρας γενόμενον, ἄραντα ἐκ τῶν 
ἀδύτων τά τε ἱερὰ τῶν μεγάλων θεῶν καὶ ὅπερ 
ἔτι περιῆν Παλλάδιον (θάτερον γὰρ ᾽Οδυσσέα καὶ 
/ / > ” > / 
Διομήδην νυκτός φασιν εἰς ἤΐλιον ἀφικομένους 
κλοπῇ λαβεῖν) οἴχεσθαί τε κομίσαντα" ἐκ τῆς 
- > ~ 
πόλεως καὶ ἐλθεῖν ἄγοντα εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν. ‘Apxtivos 
δέ φησιν ὑπὸ Διὸς δοθῆναι Aapddvw []αλλάδιον ἕν 
cine? a bAstis / , ε ΄ ελ΄ 
καὶ εἶναι τοῦτο ἐν ᾿ΪΙλίῳ τέως ἡ πόλις ἡλίσκετο 
3 
κεκρυμμένον ἐν ἀβάτῳ. εἰκόνα δ᾽ ἐκείνου κατε- 
1 Kiessling: κτίζει AB. * Reiske: civ O. 


®Cobet: ὑμετέραν O. 
4 ἐκεῖ O: ἐκεῖσε Reudler, Jacoby. 


226 


BOOK I. 68, 4-69, 3 


where he should settle, among other things that he 
learned he received this answer relating to the custody 
of the holy objects: 


“Τὰ the town thou buildest worship undying found 
To gods ancestral; guard them, sacrifice, 
Adore with choirs. For whilst these holy things 
In thy land remain, Zeus’ daughter’s gifts of old 
Bestowed upon thy spouse, secure from harm 
Thy city shal] abide forevermore.” 


LXIX. Dardanus, accordingly, left the statues in 
the city which he founded and named after himeelf, 
but when Ilium was settled later, they were removed 
thither by his descendants; and the people of 
Ilium built a temple and a sanctuary for them upon 
the citadel and preserved them with all possible 
care, looking upon them as sent from Heaven and 
as pledges of the city’s safety. And while the 
lower town was being captured. Aeneas, possessing 
himself of the citadel, took out of the sanctuary the 
images of the Great Gods and the Palladium which 
still remained (for Odysseus and Diomed, they say, 
when they came into Ilium by night, had stolen 
the other away), and carrying them with him out 
of the city, brought them into Italy. Arctinus, 
however, says that only one Palladium was given 
by Zeus to Dardanus and that this remained in 
Ilium, hidden in the sanctuary, till the city was being 
taken; but that from this a copy was made, differing 


5 ὅσης Jacoby, ws Cobet: 4 A, ἢ B. 
6 τὸν Αἰνείαν after κομίσαντα deleted by Grimm . 


227 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


σκευασμένην ws μηδὲν τῆς ἀρχετύπου διαφέρειν 
ἀπάτης τῶν ἐπιβουλευσόντων ᾿ ἕνεκεν ἐν φανερῷ 
- \ b] \ > \ >? / - 
τεθῆναι καὶ αὐτὴν ᾿Αχαιοὺς ἐπιβουλεύσαντας λαβεῖν. 
Ἁ \ > > > / e > > / / 
τὰ μὲν οὖν εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν ὑπ᾽ Αἰνείου κομισθέντα 
- / ~ 
ἱερὰ τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἀνδράσι πειθόμενος γράφω τῶν 
τε μεγάλων θεῶν εἰκόνας εἶναι, ods Σαμοθρᾷκες 
A 
“Ελλήνων μάλιστα ὀργιάζουσι, καὶ TO μυθευόμενον * 
Παλλάδιον, 6 φασι τὰς ἱερὰς φυλάττειν παρθένους 
> ~ / ς / ” \ A > FA 
ἐν ναῷ κείμενον “Kotias, ἔνθα καὶ τὸ ἀθάνατον 
ο. / ~ ¢ \ e > Ε / 7 
διασώζεται Tip: ὑπὲρ ὧν ἐν ὑστέρῳ λεχθήσεται 
λόγῳ. εἴη δ᾽ ἂν καὶ παρὰ ταῦτα τοῖς βεβήλοις 
ye: 7] pP 7) 
~ A ~ ~ 
ἡμῖν ἄδηλα ἕτερα. καὶ περὶ μὲν τῶν Τρωικῶν 
~ ~ / 
ἱερῶν τοσαῦτα εἰρήσθω. 
LXX. Ἀσκανίου δὲ ὀγδόῳ καὶ τριακοστῷ ἔτει 
- " \ ¢ 
τῆς βασιλείας τελευτήσαντος παρέλαβε τὴν ἡγε- 
3 
μονίαν Σιλούιος ἀδελφὸς ὧν ‘Ackaviov, μετὰ τὸν 
Αἰνείου θάνατον γενόμενος ἐκ Aaovivias τῆς “ατίνου 
θυγατρός, ὅν φασιν ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν ὑπὸ τῶν νομέων 
> ~ ΄ A > / / \ 
ἐκτραφῆναι. τοῦ yap AcKaviov παραλαβόντος τὴν 
\ oe Jf 
βασιλείαν περιδεὴς ἡ Aaovivia γενομένη μή τι 
> ~ / \ \ ~ ~ 
δεινὸν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ πάθῃ κατὰ TO τῆς μητρυιᾶς 
ΝΜ > 7 Ss / « \ ~ 3 
ὄνομα, ἐγκύμων οὖσα δίδωσιν ἑαυτὴν Τυρρηνῷ 3 τινι 
͵7 > ~ ~ a ” / 
συοφορβίων ἐπιμελητῇ βασιλικῶν, ov ἤδει Aativy 
/ > - / / > 
γενόμενον ev τοῖς μάλιστα προσήγορον. ὁ δ᾽ εἰς 
1 Schwartz: ἐπιβουλευόντων O, Jacoby. 
2 Kiessling: μεμυθευμένον O. 


8 Τυρρηνῷ Steph., Tvppw Gelenius, Portus: τυράννωι ABa, 
συρρηνὼ Bb. 


228 


BOOK I. 69, 3-70, 2 


in no respect from the original, and exposed to 
public view, on purpose to deceive those who might 
be planning to steal it, and that the Achaeans, 
having formed such a plan, took the copy away. I 
say, therefore, upon the authority of the men above- 
mentioned, that the holy objects brought into Italy 
by Aeneas were the images of the Great Gods, to 
whom the Samothracians, of all the Greeks, pay 
the greatest worship, and the Palladium, famous in 
legend, which they say is kept by the holy virgins 
in the temple of Vesta, where the perpetual fire is 
also preserved; but concerning these matters 1 
shall speak hereafter.1 And there may also be other 
objects besides these which are kept secret from us 
who are not initiated. But let this suffice concerning 
the holy objects of the Trojans. 

LXX. Upon 5 the death of Ascanius in the thirty- 
eighth year of his reign, Silvius, his brother, succeeded 
to the rule. He was born of Lavinia, the daughter 
of Latinus, after the death of Aeneas, and they say 
that he was brought up on the mountains by the 
herdsmen. For when Ascanius took over the rule, 
Lavinia, becoming alarmed lest her relationship as 
step-mother might draw upon her some severity 
from him, and being then with child, entrusted her- 
self to a certain Tyrrhenus,® who had charge of the 
royal herds of swine and whom she knew to have been 
on very intimate terms with Latinus. He, carrying 


1ii. 66. *For chaps. 70-71 cf. Livy i. 3, 6-10. 

*The name appears as Tyrrheus or Tyrrhus in Virgil 
(Aen. vil. 485), the only other author who mentions such 
an individual. Tyrrh(e)us, like Turnus, is apparently a 
modified form of Tyrrhenus; ¢f. p. 211, n. 1. 


229 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> > \ ~ ~ 
ὕλας ἐρήμους ἀγαγὼν αὐτὴν ws τῶν ἐπιτυχουσῶν 
/ > ~ A 3 / » 
τινα, φυλαττόμενος ὀφθῆναι τοῖς εἰδόσιν ἔτρεφεν 
ἐν τῇ νάπῃ κατασκευάσας οἴκησιν οὐ πολλοῖς 
γνώριμον, καὶ τὸ παιδίον γενόμενον ' ἀναιρεῖταί τε 
\ / / > / > \ ~ σ σ΄ 
καὶ τρέφει Σιλούιον ὀνομάσας ἀπὸ τῆς ὕλης, ὥσπερ 
«ς ~ 
av et τις ᾿Ελλάδι γλώσσῃ λέξειεν “YAaiov. χρόνου 
- \ , ~ 
δὲ προϊόντος ws πολλὴν ζήτησιν ἔγνω τῆς γυναικὸς 
~ > 
ὑπὸ τῶν Aativwy γινομένην καὶ δι᾽ αἰτίας ὄντα 
΄- \ 
παρὰ τῷ πλήθει τὸν Ackdvov, ws ἀνῃρηκότα τὴν 
παιδίσκην, φράζει τῷ δήμῳ τὸ πρᾶγμα καὶ τὴν 
ἄνθρωπον ἄγει μετὰ τοῦ παιδὸς ἐκ τῆς νάπης. 
τύχῃ μὲν δὴ τοιαύτῃ χρησάμενος ὁ Σιλούϊος τὴν 
εἰρημένην ἔσχεν ὀνομασίαν καὶ τὸ ἐξ ἐκείνου γένος 
ἅπαν, τὴν δὲ βασιλείαν παρέλαβεν, ἐπειδὴ τὸν 
> A ᾽ “- ~ / > , 
ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ τελευτῆσαι συνέπεσεν, ἀμφίλογον 
γενομένην πρὸς ἕνα τὸν πρεσβεύσαντα τῶν ἄσκα- 
~ \ > A 
viov παίδων ἤϊουλον ἀξιοῦντα τὴν πατρῴαν ἀρχὴν 
διαδέξασθαι. τὴν δὲ δίκην ἐπεψήφισεν ὁ δῆμος 
ἄλλοις τε “ὑπαχθεὶς λόγοις καὶ οὐχ ἤκοθῃα ὅτι 
μητρὸς ἦν ὁ Σιλούϊος ἐπικλήρου τῆς ἀρχῆς. ᾿ΪΙούλῳ 
δὲ ἀντὶ τῆς βασιλείας ἱερά τις ἐξουσία προσετέθη 
~ a / 
καὶ τιμὴ τῷ τε ἀκινδύνῳ προὔχουσα τῆς μοναρχίας 4 
- ~ Δ \ > > \ \ > 
Kal TH ῥᾳστώνῃ Tod βίου, ἣν ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ τὸ ἐξ 
> ~ / > - ἘΝ iA 5 Xr θέ ΜΒ τὴς ἃ 
αὐτοῦ γένος ἐκαρποῦτο, ᾿ἰΪούλιοιδ κληθέντες ἀπ 
\ / 
ἐκείνου. ἐγένετο δὲ μέγιστος ἅμα Kat λαμπρότατος 
ames - , 
οἴκων οὗτος ὧν ἡμεῖς ἴσμεν, ἄνδρας τε διαφορωτά- 
1 οὐ πολλοῖς... γενόμενον BC: om. A, ἧς τὸ ἐγκυμονούμενον 
ἀποκυησάσης CmgD. 


2 δὲ added by Gelenius. 
8 τῆς ἀρχῆς Reiske: τῇ ἀρχῇ O- 


230 


BOOK I. 70, 2-4 


her into the lonely woods as if she were an ordinary 
woman, and taking care that she was not seen by 
anyone who knew her, supported her in a house 
he built in the forest, which was known to but 
few. And when the child was born, he took it up 
and reared it, naming it, from the wood, Silvius, 
or, as one might say in Greek, Hylaios. But in the 
course of time, finding that the Latins made great 
search for the woman and that the people accused 
Ascanius of having put her to death, he acquainted 
them with the whole matter and brought the woman 
and her son out of the forest. From this experience 
Silvius got his name, as 1 have related, and so did all 
his posterity. And he became king after the death of 
his brother, though not without a contest with one 
of the sons of Ascanius,—lIulus, the eldest,—who 
claimed the succession to his father’s rule; the 
issue was decided by vote of the people, who were in- 
fluenced chiefly by this consideration, among others, 
that Silvius’ mother was heiress to the kingdom. 
Upon Lulus was conferred, instead of the sovereignty, 
a certain sacred authority and honour preferable 
to the royal dignity both for security and ease of 
life, and this prerogative} was enjoyed even to m 

day by his posterity, who were called Julii after him. 
This house became the greatest and at the same 
time the most illustrious of any we know of, and 


1The reference is probably to the office of pontifex 
maximus, held by both Julius Caesar and Augustus. 





* μοναρχίας B: μοναρχικῆς R. 
δ Gelenius: ἴουλοι O. 


231 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ςὖν ᾿ A 
Tous ἡγεμόνων ἤνεγκεν, οἷς TO εὐγενὲς αἱ ἀρεταὶ μὴ 
> a“ θ / Ἡ €: \ - > LAA ὃ λ θή 
ἀπιστεῖσθαι παρέσχον - ὑπὲρ ὧν ἐν ἄλλῳ δηλωθήσεται 
λόγῳ τὰ προσήκοντα. 
> i: / Μ 
LXXI. Σιλουΐου δ᾽ ἑνὸς δέοντα τριάκοντα ἔτη 
~ / 
κατασχόντος τὴν ἀρχὴν Αἰνείας υἱὸς αὐτοῦ διαδεξά- 
μενος τὴν δυναστείαν évi πλείω τριάκοντα ἐτῶν 
ἐβασίλευσεν. μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον ἕν καὶ πεντήκοντα 
= > ” ” \ =~ en 
Alativos ἦρξεν ἔτη: ᾿Αλβας δὲ μετὰ τοῦτον Evos 
” ” / 
δέοντα τετταράκοντα ἔτη: μετὰ δὲ AABav Κάπετος 
Δ geal | a 4 »” Kea ὃ - δέ. 
ἕξ ἐπὶ τοῖς εἴκοσιν: ἔπειτα Kamus δυεῖν δέοντα 
τριάκοντα. μετὰ δὲ Κάπυν Κάλπετος ἄχρι τρισκαί- 
~ \ > / ¢e ~ \ - 
δεκα ἐτῶν κατέσχε τὴν ἀρχήν. ἑξῆς δὲ Τιβερῖνος 
΄ > / ~ > - 
ὀκταετῆ χρόνον ἐβασίλευσεν. τελευτῆσαι δ᾽ οὗτος 
> / \ ~ / / 4 
ἐν μάχῃ παρὰ ποταμῷ γενομένῃ λέγεται" παρενε- 
\ ~ pet > / e ~ 
χθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ ῥεύματος ἐπώνυμον ἑαυτῷ κατέ- 
hue τὸν ποταμὸν “AABovAav! καλούμενον πρότερον. 
Τιβερίνου δὲ διάδ Aypt E ἱ ΐ 
iPepivov δὲ διάδοχος Ἀγρίππας ἕν καὶ τετταρά- 
Ν \ Va > 
κοντα ἐβασίλευσεν ἔτη. μετὰ δὲ Ἀγρίππαν AdAd- 
~ \ ~ > / 
διος τυραννικόν τι χρῆμα καὶ θεοῖς ἀπεχθόμενον 
Υ͂ - ~ A 
ἑνὸς δέοντα εἴκοσιν: ᾧ περιφρονοῦντι τὰ δαιμόνια 
~ / 
κατεσκεύαστο κεραυνῶν τε μιμήματα καὶ κτύποι 
~ ~ : / A > 
βρονταῖς ἐμφερεῖς, οἷς δεδίττεσθαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους 
ες θ A > / " β δὲ \ ~ > ‘ 
ὡς θεὸς ἠξίου. ὄμβρων de καὶ κεραυνῶν εἰς Tov 
=~ / ~ / 
οἶκον αὐτοῦ κατασκηψάντων τῆς Te λίμνης, παρ᾽ 
ἣν οἰκῶν ἐτύ λ Joav οὐκ εἰωθυῖαν λαβού 
ἣν οἰκῶν ἐτύγχανε, πλημμύραν ὠθυῖαν λαβού- 
/ > / ‘ ~ 
ons κατακλυσθεὶς πανοίκιος ἀπόλλυται. καὶ νῦν 
=~ ΄ > / ,ὔ -“ 
ἔτι διαλαμπούσης τῆς λίμνης ἐν μέρει τινί, ὅταν 
\ ~ \ \ ¢ \ / 
ὑπονοστήσῃ τὸ νᾶμα καὶ σταθερὸς ὁ βυθὸς γένηται, 
232 


BOOK I. 70, 4-71, 3 


produced the most distinguished commanders, whose 
virtues were so many proofs of their nobility. But 
concerning them I shall say what is requisite in 
another place. 

LXXI. Silvius, after holding the sovereignty 
twenty-nine years, was succeeded by Aeneas, his 
son, who reigned thirty-one years. After him, 
Latinus reigned fifty-one, then Alba thirty-nine ; 
after Alba, Capetus reigned twenty-six, then Capys 
twenty-eight, and after Capys, Calpetus held the 
rule for thirteen years. Then Tiberinus reigned for 
a period of eight years. This king, it is said, was 
slain in a battle that was fought near a river, and 
being carried away by the stream, gave his name 
to the river, which had previously been called the 
Albula. Tiberinus’ successor, Agrippa, reigned forty- 
one years. After Agrippa, Allodius, a tyrannical 
creature and odious to the gods, reigned nine- 
teen years. Contemptuous of the divine powers, he 
had contrived imitations of lightning and sounds 
resembling thunder-claps, with which he proposed 
to terrify people as if he were a god. But rain 
and lightning descended upon his house, and 
the lake beside which it stood rose to an unusual 
height, so that he was overwhelmed and destroyed 
with his whole household. And even now when 
the lake is clear in a certain part, which happens 
whenever the flow of water subsides and the depths 


1 This promise is not fulfilled in the extant portions of 
the history. 





1Steph.: ἄλβυλαν Bb, ἄλβαν ABa. 
233 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


(ὃ > / \ LAA > ᾽ὔ " » 

παστάδων ἐρείπια καὶ ἄλλα οἰκήσεως ἴχνη φαίνεται. 

5 - 

Aovevtivos δὲ παρὰ τούτου τὴν δυναστείαν διαδεξά- 

> > - ~ 3 

μενος, ab οὗ τῶν ἑπτὰ λόφων τις ἐπώνυμος ἐγένετο 

τῶν συμπεπολισμένων τῇ “Ῥώμῃ, τριάκοντα καὶ 

ες ” \ \ 

ἑπτὰ ἔτη τὴν ἀρχὴν κατέσχεν. []ρόκας δὲ μετὰ 
~ ” 

τοῦτον ἔτη εἴκοσι καὶ τρία. ἔπειτα ΑἈμόλιος ov 
A A 

σὺν δίκῃ τὴν βασιλείαν κατασχὼν Νεμέτορι προσ- 

’ Δ Cos > ~ / 7) Xr / ὃ ’ 

ἤκουσαν, ὃς ἦν αὐτῷ πρεσβύτερος ἀδελφός, δύο 
A / yy 

Kal τετταράκοντα ἔτη δυναστεύει. ‘ApodAiou δὲ 

> θέ e \ Ῥ / Se we. / ἢ “ > 

ἀναιρεθέντος ὑπὸ “Ῥωμύλου καὶ “Popov! τῶν ἐκ 
~ « ~ / 

τῆς ἱερᾶς κόρης γενομένων, ws αὐτίκα λεχθήσεται, 

μετὰ τὸν ἐκείνου θάνατον ἀπολαμβάνει τὴν κατὰ 

νόμον δυναστείαν Νεμέτωρ ὁ τῶν νεανίσκων μητρο- 
/ ~ 5 tea ~ ~ 

πάτωρ. τῷ δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἔτει τῆς Νεμέτορος ἀρχῆς, 

δευτέρῳ δὲ καὶ τριακοστῷ καὶ τετρακοσιοστῷ μετὰ 

> 

τὴν ᾿Ιλίου ἅλωσιν, ἀποικίαν στείλαντες ᾿Αλβανοὶ 

Ῥ 5A \ Ῥ, / \ ¢ / Wan > / 
ὠμύλου καὶ “Pajpov τὴν ἡγεμονίαν αὐτῆς ἐχόν- 

« - - 

των κτίζουσι Ῥώμην ἔτους ἐνεστῶτος πρώτου τῆς 

2 ὃ / 5A (ὃ Δ >. / “ ~ 

ἑβδόμης ὀλυμπιάδος, ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον AaikAjs 

Μεσσήνιος, ἄρχοντος Ἀθήνησι Χάροπος ἔτος τῆς 

δεκαετίας πρῶτον. 
LXXII. “ἀμφισβητήσεως δὲ πολλῆς οὔσης καὶ 

περὶ τοῦ χρόνου τῆς κτίσεως καὶ περὶ τῶν οἰκιστῶν 

τῆς πόλεως οὐδὲ αὐτὸς ᾧμην δεῖν ὥσπερ ὁμολογού- 


1 ῥέμου A (a spelling found in several later passages, now 
in A, now in B). 





1 Kirby F. Smith has pointed out (Am. Jour. Philol. 
xvi., 1895, p. 205) that the Alban Lake is fed entirely from 
the bottorn by gushing springs, so that νᾶμα here has its 


234 


BOOK I. 71, 3-72, 1 


are undisturbed,! the ruins of porticoes and other 
traces of a dwelling appear. Aventinus, after whom 
was named one of the seven hills that are joined to 
make the city of Rome, succeeded him in the sover- 
eignty and reigned thirty-seven years, and after him 
Proca twenty-three years. Then Amulius, having 
unjustly possessed himself of the kingdom which 
belonged to Numitor, his elder brother, reigned forty- 
two years. But when Amulius had been slain by 
Romulus and Remus, the sons of the holy maiden, as 
shall presently be related, Numitor, the maternal 
grandfather of the youths, after his brother’s death 
resumed the sovereignty which by law belonged 
to him. In the next year of Numitor’s reign, which 
was the four hundred and thirty-second after the 
taking of Troy, the Albans sent out a colony, under 
the leadership of Romulus and Remus, and founded 
Rome, in the beginning of the first year of the seventh 
Olympiad, when Daicles of Messené was victor in the 
foot race, and at Athens Charops was in the first year 
of his ten-year term as archon.” 

LXXII. But as there is great dispute concerning 
both the time of the building of the city and the 
founders of it, 1 have thought it incumbent on me 
also not to give merely a cursory account of these 


ordinary meaning of “spring” or “ running water,” and 
σταθερός is used with particular appropriateness of the 
depths of this lake. 

2751 B.c. According to the common tradition the 
archonship, which was at first held for life, was in 752 
limited to a ten-year term, and finally, ca. 683, to a single 
year. See Grote, History of Greece, Part ii., chap. x. 
(beginning); von Schoeffer in Pauly-Wissowa, Real- 
Encyclopddie, s.v. Archontes, cols. 569 f. 


235 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μενα πρὸς: ἁπάντων ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς ἐπελθεῖν. Κεφά- 
λων μὲν γὰρ ὃ [Ὁ εργίθιος συγγραφεὺς παλαιὸς πάνυ 
δευτέρᾳ γενεᾷ μετὰ τὸν ᾿Ϊλιακὸν πόλεμον ἐκτίσθαι 
λέγει τὴν πόλιν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐξ ᾽Ιλίου διασωθέντων σὺν 
Αἰνείᾳ, οἰκιστὴν δὲ αὐτῆς ἀποφαίνει τὸν ἡγησάμενον 
τῆς ἀποικίας ἱΡῶμον, τοῦτον δ᾽ εἶναι τῶν Αἰνείου 
, “ / / > / / 
παίδων ἕνα: τέτταρας δέ φησιν Αἰνείᾳ γενέσθαι 
παῖδας, Ackdviov, Εὐρυλέοντα, “Ῥωμύλον, “Ρῶμον. 
εἴρηται δὲ καὶ Anpayope καὶ ᾿Αγαθύλλῳ καὶ ἄλλοις 
συχνοῖς ὅ τε χρόνος καὶ ὃ “τῆς ἀποικίας ἡγεμὼν ὁ 
αὐτός. ὁ δὲ τὰς ἱερείας τὰς ἐν Ἄργει καὶ τὰ καθ᾽ 
ἑκάστην πραχθέντα συναγαγὼν Αἰνείαν φησὶν ἐκ 
Μολοττῶν εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν ἐλθόντα μετ᾽ ᾿Οδυσσέως 1 
οἰκιστὴν γενέσθαι τῆς πόλεως, ὀνομάσαι δ᾽ αὐτὴν 
> \ ~ ~ , / ς ἴω Α \ / 
ἀπὸ μιᾶς τῶν ᾿Ιλιάδων Ῥώμης. ταύτην δὲ λέγει 
ταῖς ἄλλαις Τρωάσι παρακελευσαμένην κοινῇ μετ᾽ 
αὐτῶν ἐμπρῆσαι τὰ σκάφη βαρυνομένην τῇ πλάνῃ. 
e ~ > > ~ \ / ¢ A An wv 
ὁμολογεῖ δ᾽ αὐτῷ καὶ Δαμάστης ὁ Atyevs καὶ ἄλλοι 
/ > / \ ε / > ~ 
τινές. ἸΑριστοτέλης δὲ ὁ φιλόσοφος ᾿Αχαιῶν twas 


1 ὀδυσσέως R: ὀδυσσέα B, Jacoby. 





1 See p. 157, n. 3. 

2 “Ῥῶμος was the name invented by the Greeks for the 
founder of Rome before they had heard of any Romulus or 
Remus ; later they used it as the equivalent of Remus. It 
seems best to translate it as Romus (or Romos), except 
where we are clearly dealing with the Roman legend of 
the twin brothers. See recent discussions of the growth of 
the legend by Carter in Roscher’s Lexikon der griech. u. rém. 
Mythologie, s.v. Romulus, cols. 167-83; Rosenberg in Pauly- 
Wissowa, Real-Enc., s.v. Romulus, cols. 1074-92 ; De Sanctis, 
Storia dei Romani, i. pp. 206-17. 


236 


BOOK I. 72, 1-3 


things, as if they were universally agreed on. For 
Cephalon of Gergis,! a very ancient writer, says that 
the city was built in the second generation after the 
Trojan war by those who had escaped from Troy with 
Aeneas, and he names as the founder of it Romus,? 
who was the leader of the colony and one of Aeneas’ 
sons; he adds that Aeneas had four sons, Ascanius, 
Euryleon, Romulus and Romus. And Demagoras,* 
Agathyllus and many others agree with him as regards 
both the time and the leader of the colony. But the 
author of the history of the priestesses at Argos ἢ 
and of what happened in the days of each of them 
says that Aeneas came into Italy from the land of the 
Molossians with Odysseus® and became the founder 
of the city, which he named after Romé, one of the 
Trojan women. He says that this woman, growing 
weary with wandering, stirred up the other Trojan 
women and together with them set fire to the ships. 
And Damastes of Sigeum ® and some others agree 
with him. But Aristotle, the philosopher, relates ὦ 


* Demagoras of Samos apparently wrote a work on 
Trojan or Samothracian antiquities. Agathyllus has 
already been cited in chap. 49, 2. 

* The author of this work was Hellanicus (see p. 71, n. 1). 
The present quotation is frag. 53 (end) in Miller, Frag. 
Hist. Graec. i. 52. 

° A variant reading is “after Odysseus.”’ See critical 
note. 

5 Damastes (ca. 400) wrote the genealogies of the Greek 
leaders before Troy ; also a description of the earth and its 
peoples, to accompany his map of the world. 

7 Probably in his Instituta Barbarica. Miller, Frag. 
Hist. Graec. ii. 178, 242. 


237 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ς - ~ > , 
ἱστορεῖ τῶν ἀπὸ Τροίας ἀνακομισαμένων περιπλέον- 
τας ἤΠιαλέαν, ἔπειτα χειμῶνι βιαίῳ καταληφθέντας 
τέως μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν πνευμάτων φερομένους πολλαχῇ 
τοῦ πελάγους πλανᾶσθαι, τελευτῶντας δ᾽ ἐλθεῖν εἰς 
τὸν τόπον τοῦτον τῆς Οπικῆς, ὃς καλεῖται Aatinov! 
FIN ~ ~ / / > 
ἐπὶ τῷ Τυρρηνικῷ πελάγει κείμενος. ἀσμένους δὲ 
~ > ~ ~ 
τὴν γῆν ἰδόντας ἀνελκῦσαί τε τὰς vats αὐτόθι καὶ 
΄- Ἁ \ ‘ 
διατρῖψαι THY χειμερινὴν ὥραν παρασκευαζομένους 
> - ~ ΄- 
ἔαρος ἀρχομένου πλεῖν. ἐμπρησθεισῶν δὲ αὐτοῖς 
ὑπὸ νύκτα τῶν νεῶν οὐκ ἔχοντας ὅπως ποιήσονται 
\ » 3 ΄ ΦΈΡ \ , > © 
τὴν ἄπαρσιν, ἀβουλήτῳ ἀνάγκῃ τοὺς βίους ἐν w 
κατήχθησαν χωρίῳ ἱδρύσασθαι. συμβῆναι δὲ αὐ- 
τοῖς τοῦτο διὰ γυναῖκας αἰχμαλώτους, ἃς ἔτυχον 
ἄγοντες ἐξ ᾿Ιλίου. ταύτας δὲ κατακαῦσαι τὰ πλοῖα 
΄ \ ” ~ 3 ~ ΝΜ « 
φοβουμένας τὴν οἴκαδε τῶν Ἀχαιῶν ἄπαρσιν, ὡς 
εἰς δουλείαν ἀφιξομένας. Καλλίας δὲ ὁ τὰς Aya- 
/ / 3 ΄, ῬῬ ΄ \ by 4 
θοκλέους πράξεις ἀναγράψας Ῥώμην twa Τρωάδα 
~ > / -“ - » ‘ > 
τῶν ἀφικνουμένων ἅμα τοῖς ἄλλοις Τρωσὶν ets 
᾿Ιταλίαν γήμασθαι Aatiw τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν Afo- 
΄ ~ A « ~ 
ριγίνων καὶ γεννῆσαι τρεῖς 5 παῖδας, “Pdpov καὶ 
“Ῥωμύλον καὶ 5 Τηλέγονον ἃ. .. οἰκίσαντας δὲ 
΄ > \ ~ \ ᾿] lol θέ θ »" 
πόλιν, ἀπὸ τῆς μητρὸς αὐτῇ θέσθαι τούὔνομα. 
-- ͵ \ Ὃ \ 708 ΄ \ tds 
Ξεναγόρας δὲ 6 συγγραφεὺς ᾽Οδυσσέως καὶ Κίρκης 


1 Δατίνιον O: Λάτιον Steph., “αουδνιιον Kiessling. 

2 zpeis B: δύο R. 

3 καὶ B: om. R. 

4 Τηλέγονον added (from Syncellus) by Ritschl, who in- 
dicated the loss of other words following this. 


238 


BOOK I. 72. 3-5 


that some of the Achaeans, while they were doubling 
Cape Malea on their return from Troy, were overtaken 
by a violent storm, and being for some time driven 
out of their course by the winds, wandered over 
many parts of the sea, till at last they came to this 
place in the land of the Opicans which is called 
Latinium,! lying on the Tyrrhenian sea. And being 
pleased with the sight of land, they hauled up their 
ships, stayed there the winter season, and were pre- 
paring to sail at the beginning of spring; but when 
their ships were set on fire in the night and they 
were unable to sail away, they were compelled 
against their will to fix their abode in the place 
where they had landed. This fate, he says, was 
brought upon them by the captive women they were 
carrying with them from Troy, who burned the 
ships, fearing that the Achaeans in returning home 
would carry them into slavery. Callias,? who wrote 
of the deeds of Agathocles, says that Romé, one 
of the Trojan women who came into Italy with the 
other Trojans, married Latinus, the king of the 
Aborigines, by whom she had three sons, Romus, 
Romulus and Telegonus, . . . and having built a 
city, gave it the name of their mother. Xenagoras, 
the historian,® writes that Odysseus and Circé had 


1 Probably originally an adjective (like the later Aarivn), 
“486 Latin land.’’ Some have wished to read Latium or 
Lavinium. 

2 Callias wrote the history of Agathocles in 22 books, 
His account was so biased in favour of that tyrant that 
he was accused of having been heavily bribed by him. 

3’ Xenagoras (date uncertain) wrote a historical work 
called Xpovo. and a book about islands. Miller, Frag. 
Hist. Graec. iv. 527, 6. 


239 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


os δα ‘ A « - ᾽ 
υἱοὺς γενέσθαι τρεῖς, ᾿Ῥῶμον, ‘'Avteiav,! ᾿Αρδείανϑ: 
> U ἊΝ - ~ ‘ ~ 
οἰκίσαντας δὲ τρεῖς πόλεις ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν θέσθαι τοῖς 
΄ \ ? τ 7 \ [ \ 
κτίσμασι τὰς ὀνομασίας. Διονύσιος δὲ ὁ Χαλκιδεὺς 
> ~ ζω “ 
οἰκιστὴν μὲν ἀποφαίνει τῆς πόλεως ᾿Ρῶμον: τοῦτον 
δὲ λέγει κατὰ μέν τινας ᾿Ασκανίου, κατὰ δέ τινας 
ἜΓ ἢ > aw > 4 ὩΣ « \ 
μαθίωνος εἶναι παῖδα. εἰσὶ δέ τινες οἵ τὴν 
ξ΄ , ͵ ~ ~ 
᾿ώμην ἐκτίσθαι λέγουσιν ὑπὸ ᾿Ρώμου τοῦ ᾿Ϊταλοῦ, 
μητρὸς δὲ Λευκαρίας ὃ τῆς Aativov θυγατρός 
LXXIII. ἔχων δὲ πολλοὺς καὶ ἄλλους τῶν 
“ΕἩλληνικῶν παρέχεσθαι συγγραφέων, ot διαφόρους 
ἀποφαίνουσι τοὺς οἰκιστὰς τῆς πόλεως, ἵνα μὴ 
2 A > « 
δόξω ᾿ μακρηγορεῖν ἐπὶ τοὺς “Ρωμαίων ἐλεύσομαι 
συγγραφεῖς. παλαιὸς μὲν οὖν οὔτε συγγραφεὺς 
Μ / > \ « / » \ e > 
οὔτε λογογράφος ἐστὶ “Ρωμαίων οὐδὲ εἷς: ἐκ 
= / / > ς - ΄ / 
παλαιῶν μέντοι λόγων ἐν ἱεραῖς δέλτοις σωζομένων 
iA / \ 2 / 4 ΄ 
ἕκαστός τι παραλαβὼν ἀνέγραψεν. τούτων δέ τινες 
\ > / ΄, θ ἐν ΄ ῬΡ, ξ΄ 
μὲν Αἰνείου γενέσθαι υἱοὺς λέγουσι “Ῥωμύλον τε 
1: ~ A > A ~ € 4 7 κ 
καὶ ἹΡῶμον τοὺς οἰκιστὰς τῆς “Ρώμης, ἕτεροι δὲ 
«Ὁ. a 
θυγατρὸς Αἰνείου παῖδας, ὅτου δὲ πατρὸς οὐκέτι 
/ ~ > \ €.-4 3 > ͵ ΄ 
διορίζοντες δοθῆναι δ᾽ αὐτοὺς ὑπ᾽ Αἰνείου Ματίνῳ 
τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν ᾿Αβοριγίνων ὁμηρεύσοντας, ὅτε καὶ 
- > ΄ ‘ \ ᾽ ΄ 
αἱ πίστεις τοῖς ἐπιχωρίοις πρὸς τοὺς ἐπήλυδας 
ἐγένοντο. ἀσπαζόμενον δὲ αὐτοὺς Λατῖνον τῇ τε 
a > 
ἄλλῃ θεραπείᾳ περιέπειν εὖ Kal ἐκγόνου ἄρρενος 
»” A ~ \ ~ 
ἄπαιδα τελευτῶντα διαδόχους μέρους τινὸς τῆς 
1 ᾿Αντείαν Steph. Byz.: ἀντίαν O. 
2 ἀρδεῖαν B: ἀρδίαν A. 


3. Kiessling: ἠλέκτρας A, λεύκτρας Β. 
4 Bucheler: δόξαιμι AB. 


240 


BOOK I. 72, 5-73, 2 


three sons, Romus, Anteias and Ardeias, who built 
three cities and called them after their own names.! 
Dionysius of Chalcis 5 names Romus as the founder of 
the city, but says that according to some this man 
was the son of Ascanius, and according to others 
the son of Emathion. There are others who de- 
clare that Rome was built by Romus, the son of 
Italus and Leucaria, the daughter of Latinus. 
LXXIII. I could cite many other Greek historians 
who assign different founders to the city, but, not 
to appear prolix, I shall come to the Roman his- 
torians. The Romans, to be sure, have not so much 
as one single historian or chronicler who is ancient ; 
however, each of their historians has taken some- 
thing out of ancient accounts that are preserved on 
sacred tablets.? Some of these say that Romulus 
and Remus, the founders of Rome, were the sons οὗ 
Aeneas, others say that they were the sons of a 
daughter of Aeneas, without going on to determine 
who was their father; that they were delivered 
as hostages by Aeneas to-Latinus, the king of the 
Aborigines, when the treaty was made between the 
inhabitants and the new-comers, and that Latinus, 
after giving them a kindly welcome, not only did 
them many other good offices, but, upon dying with- 
out male issue, left them his successors to some part 


1 Rome, Antium and Ardea. 

2 Dionysius of Chalcis (fourth century ?) wrote several 
books of Κτίσεις or “ἡ Foundings of Cities.” Miller, Frag. 
Hist. Graec: iv. 395, 11: 

3 This probably refers to the annales maximi, the brief 
record of magistrates, prodigies and important public 
events of each year kept by the pontifex maximus. Cf. iv. 
30, 3. 


241 
VOL. I. K 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


3 ἑαυτοῦ ἀρχῆς καταλιπεῖν. ἄλλοι δὲ λέγουσιν 
Αἰνείου τελευτήσαντος Ασκάνιον ἅπασαν τὴν Aa- 
τίνων ἀρχὴν παραλαβόντα νείμασθαι πρὸς τοὺς 
5 \ « / ee: ~ / / 
ἀδελφοὺς “Ῥωμύλον te καὶ Ρῶμον τήν τε χώραν 
καὶ τὴν δύναμιν τὴν Aativwy τριχῇ" αὐτὸν μὲν 
δὴ τήν τε “AABav κτίσαι καὶ ἄλλ᾽ ἄττα πολίσματα" 
« - \ / \ 5 \ ~ / / 
Pépov δὲ Καπύην μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ προπάππου Kavos, 
3 / \ > \ ~ / > , > / 
Ayxtonv δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ προπάτορος Ayyicov, Αἰνείαν 
δὲ τὴν ὕστερον κληθεῖσαν ᾿Ϊάνικλον ἀπὸ τοῦ πατρός, 
Ῥ / ὃ \ > > ¢ ~ > θ / 1 / \ 

ὦμην δὲ ad ἑαυτοῦ ὀνομασθείσας. ταύτην δὲ 
χρόνους τινὰς ἐρημωθεῖσαν ἑτέρας αὖθις ἐλθούσης 
> / Δ 3 ιν» « "4 € / 
ἀποικίας, ἣν ‘AABavoi ἔστειλαν ἡγουμένου “Ῥωμύλου 

L “Ῥώμου, τὴν ἀρχαίαν κλῆσιν 5 ἀπολαβεῖν: ὥστε 
διττὰς εἶναι τῆς “Ῥώμης τὰς κτίσεις, τὴν μὲν ὀλίγον 
ὕστερον τῶν Τρωικῶν γενομένην, τὴν δὲ πεντεκαί- 

4 δεκα γενεαῖς ὑστεροῦσαν τῆς προτέρας. εἰ δέ τις 
ἀπιδεῖν βουλήσεται τὰ προσωτέρω καὶ τρίτη τις 
ἀρχαιοτέρα τούτων εὑρεθήσεται “Ρώμη γενομένη 

\ > / \ ~ > A ᾽ > / ~ 
πρὶν Αἰνείαν καὶ Τρῶας ἐλθεῖν εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν. ταῦτα 
δὲ οὐ τῶν ἐπιτυχόντων τις οὐδὲ νέων συγγραφεὺς 
ἱστόρηκεν, ἀλλ᾽ ᾿Αντίοχος 6 Συρακούσιος, οὗ καὶ 
πρότερον ἐμνήσθην. φησὶ δὲ Μόργητος ἐν ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ 

/ ΄ι \ / > / ¢ > ‘\ / 
βασιλεύοντος (ἦν δὲ τότε ᾿Ιταλία ἡ ἀπὸ Τάραντος 

1 ὀνομασθείσας added by Sauppe, who assumed the loss 
of several lines here, in which mention was made of the 
cities founded by Romulus. But it is quite probable that 
in this earlier tradition, which would appear to be more 
Greek than Roman, Romulus played somewhat the same 
subordinate réle that Remus did at a later stage; he may 
simply have aided his brother (who might better be called 


Romus here) in founding the four cities named. Indeed, 
the Etymologicum Magnum (s.v. Καπύη et Ῥώμη) states 


242 


BOOK 1. 73, 3-4 


of his kingdom. Others say that after the death of 
Aeneas Ascanius, having succeeded to the entire 
sovereignty of the Latins, divided both the country 
and the forces of the Latins into three parts, two of 
which he gave to his brothers, Romulus and Remus. 
He himself, they say, built Alba and some other 
towns; Remus built cities which he named Capua, 
after Capys, his great-grandfather, Anchisa, after his 
grandfather Anchises, Aeneia (which was afterwards 
called Janiculum), after his father, and Rome, 
after himself.t This last city was for some time 
deserted, but upon the arrival of another colony, 
which the Albans sent out under the leadership of 
Romulus and Remus, it received again its ancient 
name. So that, according to this account, there 
were two settlements of Rome, one a little after the 
Trojan war, and the other fifteen generations after 
the first.2, And if anyone desires to look into the 
remoter past, even a third Rome will be found, 
more ancient than these, one that was founded 
before Aeneas and the Trojans came into Italy. 
This is related by no ordinary or modern historian, but 
by Antiochus of Syracuse, whom I have mentioned 
before.? He says that when Morges reigned in Italy 
(which at that time comprehended all the seacoast 

1 Anchisa and Aeneia are otherwise unknown. See 
critical note. 

* See chap. 45, 3. 


®Chap. 12, 3; 22,5; 35,1. The present quotation is 
found in Miiller, frag. Hist. Grcec. i. 182, 7. 





on the authority of Greek writers that Capua and Rome 
were founded by Romus and Romulus, the sons of Aeneas. 
* Schwartz: κτίσιν O, Jacoby. 


243 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> ~ 
ἄχρι []]οσειδωνίας παράλιος) ἐλθεῖν ws αὐτὸν ἄνδρα 
᾿] e e ee > 
φυγάδα ἐκ “Pans. λέγει δὲ ὧδε: “ ἐπεὶ δὲ ᾿Ιταλὸς 
,ὔ ’ 9 ’ >] ‘ ͵ὔ ἊΨ A 
κατεγήρα, Mopyns ἐβασίλευσεν. ἐπὶ τούτου δὲ ἀνὴρ 
9 ¢ ~ 
ἀφίκετο ἐκ “Ῥώμης duyas: Σικελὸς ὄνομα αὐτῷ." 
A A \ A / ᾽ὔ, / 
κατὰ μὲν δὴ Tov Συρακούσιον συγγραφέα παλαιά τις 
~ -- ~ € 
εὑρίσκεται Kal προτεροῦσα τῶν Tpwrkayv' “Poin. 
= > = « ~ 
πότερον δὲ περὶ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἦν τόπους, ἐν οἷς ἡ νῦν 
οἰκουμένη πόλις ἐστίν, ἢ χωρίον ἕτερον ἐτύγχανεν 
σ 9 ’ὔ 5 \ » ͵ὔ ’ὔ 
οὕτως ὀνομαζόμενον ἀσαφὲς ἐκείνου καταλιπόντος 
90.» > J 4A 4 ~ \ ‘\ > ~ 
οὐδ᾽ ἐγὼ δύναμαι συμβαλεῖν. περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν 
~ ς ~ 
παλαιῶν κτίσεων ἱκανὰ ἡγοῦμαι τὰ προειρημένα. 
~ ~ ¢ 
LXXIV. Tov δὲ τελευταῖον γενόμενον τῆς Ρώμης 
>. \ a“ 7 nA of 7 \ ~ ¥- 
οἰκισμὸν ἢ κτίσιν ἢ 0 τι δήποτε χρὴ καλεῖν Τίμαιος 
\ [ / Ψ io a ͵ὔ ͵ὔ 
μὲν ὁ Σικελιώτης οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅτῳ κανόνι χρησάμενος 
ἅμα Καρχηδόνι κτιζομένῃ γενέσθαι φησὶν ὀγδόῳ καὶ 
~ »” ~ / 
τριακοστῷ πρότερον ἔτει τῆς πρώτης ὀλυμπιάδος" 
4 \ / 5» \ ~ >) ~ ΙΔ, 
Λεύκιος δὲ Κίγκιος, ἀνὴρ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ βουλευτικοῦ 
συνεδρίου, περὶ τὸ τέταρτον ἔτος τῆς δωδεκάτης 
ὀλυμπιάδος ἰΚόϊντος δὲ Φάβιος κατὰ τὸ πρῶτον 
~ / 
ἔτος Ths ὀγδόης ὀλυμπιάδος. Κάτων δὲ Ildpxios 
“ΕΟλληνικὸν μὲν οὐχ ὁρίζει χρόνον, ἐπιμελὴς δὲ 
‘ ‘ 
γενόμενος εἰ καί τις ἄλλος περὶ 3 τὴν συναγωγὴν 
~ c > 
τῆς ἀρχαιολογουμένης ἱστορίας ἔτεσιν ἀποφαίνει 
δυσὶ καὶ τριάκοντα καὶ τετρακοσίοις ὑστεροῦσαν 
~ > ~ ς 2 \ / ec > A 
τῶν ᾿ἰλιακῶν. ὁ δὲ χρόνος οὗτος ἀναμετρηθεὶς 


244 


BOOK I. 73, 4-74, 2 


from Tarentum to Posidonia'), a man came to him 
who had been banished from Rome. His words 
are these: ‘“‘ When Italus was growing old, Morges 
reigned. In his reign there came a man who had 
been banished from Rome; his name was Sicelus.”’ 
According to the Syracusan historian, therefore, an 
ancient Rome is found even earlier than the Trojan 
war. However, as he has left it doubtful whether it 
was situated in the same region where the present city 
stands or whether some other place happened to be 
called by this name, I, too, can form no conjecture. 
But as regards the ancient settlements of Rome, I 
think what has already been said is sufficient. 
LXXIV. As to the last settlement or founding of 
the city, or whatever we ought to call it, Timaeus 
of Sicily,” following what principle I do not know, 
places it at the same time as the founding of Carthage, 
that is, in the thirty-eighth year before the first 
Olympiad ὃ; Lucius Cincius, a member of the senate, 
places it about the fourth year of the twelfth Olym- 
piad,* and Quintus Fabius in the first year of the 
eighth Olympiad.® Porcius Cato does not give the 
time according to Greek reckoning, but being as 
careful as any writer in gathering the data of ancient 
history, he places its founding four hundred and 
thirty-two years after the Trojan war; and this 


1 Later Paestum. 2See p. 19, n. 2. 
3813 B.c. 4728 B.c. mated 17 Os Wt 





1 Τρωικῶν Reudler : τρωικῶν χρόνων O. 
2 “Ῥώμη Sylburg, om. Jacoby: ἡ ῥώμη O. 
ὃ περὶ B: εἰς Β. 


245 


DIONYSIUS OF HALTCARNASSUS 


ταῖς ᾿Ερατοσθένους χρονογραφίαις κατὰ τὸ πρῶτον 
” / ~ « > / “ / 93 
ἔτος πίπτει τῆς ἑβδόμης ὀλυμπιάδος. ὅτι δέ εἰσιν 
«ς - 
οἱ κανόνες ὑγιεῖς, οἷς ᾿Ερατοσθένης κέχρηται, καὶ 
~ > 
πῶς av τις ἀπευθύνοι τοὺς Ρωμαίων χρόνους πρὸς 
A « / > « / / / / 
τοὺς ᾿Ελληνικούς, ἐν ἑτέρῳ δεδήλωταί μοι λόγῳ. 
οὐ γὰρ ἠξίουν ws Π]ολύβιος 6 Μεγαλοπολίτης 
~ ~ \ 
τοσοῦτο μόνον εἰπεῖν, ὅτι κατὰ τὸ δεύτερον ἔτος 
- ¢ / > / \ «ς / > / 
τῆς ἑβδόμης ὀλυμπιάδος τὴν “Ῥώμην ἐκτίσθαι 
> = A“ ~ 
πείθομαι, οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῦ παρὰ τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσι" 
κειμένου πίνακος ἑνὸς καὶ μόνου τὴν πίστιν 
5 ὔ A > \ \ > 4 
ἀβασάνιστον καταλιπεῖν, ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἐπιλογισμούς, 
οἷς αὐτὸς προσεθέμην, εἰς μέσον ὑπευθύνους τοῖς 
~ 3 ΄σ > 
βουληθεῖσιν ἐσομένους ἐξενεγκεῖν. ἡ μὲν οὖν 
> ΄ > > / ~ - /, / 
ἀκρίβεια ev ἐκείνῳ δηλοῦται τῷ λόγῳ, λεχθήσεται 
~ ~ / 
δὲ καὶ διὰ τῆσδε τῆς πραγματείας αὐτὰ τἀναγκαιό- 
” \ “ ¢ ~ ” 3 a 
Tata. ἔχει δὲ οὕτως: ἡ Κελτῶν ἔφοδος, καθ᾽ ἣν 
ΦΡΦ / / ΘᾺ - δὸ e \ 
ἡ Ῥωμαίων πόλις ἑάλω, συμφωνεῖται σχεδὸν ὑπὸ 
/ / 
πάντων ἄρχοντος ᾿ἀθήνησι Ilupyiwvos γενέσθαι 
~ ~ > ~ 
κατὰ TO πρῶτον ἔτος τῆς ὀγδόης καὶ ἐνενηκοστῆς 
> / ¢ \ \ ~ / ,ὔ 
ὀλυμπιάδος. ὁ δὲ πρὸ τῆς καταλήψεως χρόνος 
> ΄- 
ἀναγόμενος εἰς Λεύκιον ᾿Ϊούνιον Βροῦτον καὶ 
“εύκιον Ταρκύνιον ολλατῖνον τοὺς πρώτους ὗπα- 
τεύσαντας ἐν Ῥώμῃ μετὰ τὴν κατάλυσιν τῶν 
\ - « 
βασιλέων ἔτη περιείληφεν εἴκοσι πρὸς τοῖς ἑκατόν. 


1 Niebuhr: ἀγχιστεῦσι AB. 





1 Eratosthenes was perhaps the most versatile scholar 
of antiquity. Eminent not only as an astronomer, 
mathematician and geographer, he also won distinction as 
an historian, philosopher and grammarian. His Chrono- 
graphiae was an annalistic history, both political and 
literary, in which especial attention was devoted to the 


246 


BOOK I. 74, 2-4 


time, being compared with the Chronicles of Eratos- 
thenes,' corresponds to the first year of the seventh 
Olympiad.* That the canons of Eratosthenes are 
sound I have shown in another treatise,* where I 
have also shown how the Roman chronology is to be 
synchronized with that of the Greeks. For I did 
not think it sufficient, like Polybius of Megalo- 
polis,* to say merely that I believe Rome was built 
in the second year of the seventh Olympiad,’ nor to 
let my belief rest without further examination upon 
the single tablet preserved by the high priests, the 
only one of its kind, but I determined to set forth 
the reasons that had appealed to me, so that all 
might examine them who so desired. In that treatise, 
therefore, the detailed exposition is given; but 
in the course of the present work also the most 
essential of the conclusions there reached will be 
mentioned. The matter stands thus: It is 
generally agreed that the invasion of the Gauls,® 
during which the city of Rome was taken, happened 
during the archonship of Pyrgion at Athens, in the 
first year of the ninety-eighth Olympiad.’ Now if 
the time before the taking of the city is reckoned 
back to Lucius Junius Brutus and Lucius Tarquinius 
Collatinus, the first consuls at Rome after the over- 
throw of the kings, it comprehends one hundred 


accurate determination of the chronology. The work 
began with the fall of Troy, which he placed in 1183 B.c. 

2751 B.c. 

3 This work, now lost, is cited by Clement of Alexandria 
(Strom. i. 102) as Χρόνοι. 

4 Probably in a lost portion of his Book V1. 

δ. 750 B.c. 

6 Literally “Celts.”” See Ὁ. 123, n. 1. 7 387 B.C. 


247 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


5 δηλοῦται δὲ ἐξ ἄλλων τε πολλῶν Kal τῶν Kadov- 
“μένων τιμητικῶν ὑπομνημάτων, ἃ διαδέχεται παῖς 
~ - - > 
παρὰ πατρὸς Kal περὶ πολλοῦ ποιεῖται τοῖς μεθ 

« ΄ 
ἑαυτὸν ἐσομένοις ὥσπερ ἱερὰ πατρῷα παραδιδόναι" 

\ > ras > \ ~ ~ ” » 
πολλοὶ δ᾽ εἰσὶν ἀπὸ τῶν τιμητικῶν οἴκων ἄνδρες 
>? - ς / > / > ἮΝ ete 
ἐπιφανεῖς οἱ διαφυλάττοντες αὐτά ἐν οἷς εὑρίσκω 
΄ c “ 
δευτέρῳ πρότερον ἔτει τῆς ἁλώσεως τίμησιν τοῦ 
“Ῥωμαίων δήμου γενομένην, ἢ παραγέγραπται 
καθάπερ καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις χρόνος οὗτος " “ ᾿Ὑπατεύον- 
/ 

τος Λευκίου Οὐαλερίου [Π]οτίτου καὶ Τίτου Μαλλίου 

\ \ ~ 
6 Καπιτωλίνου μετὰ τὴν ἐκβολὴν τῶν βασιλέων ἑνὸς 


Ν > “ \ ς ~ 
δέοντι εἰκοστῷ Kal ἑκατοστῷ 5 


” 3} 7 A 
ἔτει. ὥστε τὴν 
\ ” Δ ~ / Ἁ \ / 
Κελτικὴν ἔφοδον, ἣν τῷ δευτέρῳ μετὰ τὴν τίμησιν 

> ~ 
ἔτει γενομένην εὑρίσκομεν, ἐκπεπληρωμένων τῶν 
εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν ἐτῶν γενέσθαι. εἰ δὲ τοῦτο τὸ 
~ » 
διάστημα τοῦ χρόνου τριάκοντα ὀλυμπιάδων εὑρί- 
5 / \ > 
σκεται γενόμενον, ἀνάγκη τοὺς πρώτους ἀπο- 
/ «ς / ε λ - Μ *Ae / 
δειχθέντας ὑπάτους ὁμολογεῖν ἄρχοντος ᾿᾿θήνησιν 
3 \ \ ~ 
᾿Ισαγόρου 5 παρειληφέναι τὴν ἀρχὴν κατὰ TO πρῶ- 
~ ~ > / 
τον ἔτος τῆς ὀγδόης καὶ ἑξηκοστῆς ὀλυμπιάδος. 
Υ̓ » / ~ > ~ ~ 
LXXV. Kai μὴν ἀπό ye τῆς ἐκβολῆς τῶν 
βασιλέων ἐπὶ τὸν πρῶτον ἄρξαντα τῆς πόλεως 
« / > \ ε / ” , 
Pwpdrov ἀναβιβασθεὶς ὃ χρόνος ἔτη τέτταρα 
- > - 
πρὸς τοῖς τετταράκοντα καὶ διακοσίοις ἀποτελεῖ. 
4 \ ~ ~ ~ ~ , 
γνωρίζεται δὲ τοῦτο ταῖς διαδοχαῖς τῶν βασιλέων 
- Φ \ 
καὶ τοῖς ἔτεσιν οἷς ἕκαστοι κατέσχον τὴν ἀρχήν. 
« / \ \ ¢ / A ΄ « \ \ 
᾿ωμύλος μὲν yap ὁ κτίσας τὴν πόλιν ἑπτὰ καὶ 
248 


BOOK TI. 74, 5-75, 1 


and twenty years. This is proved in many other 
ways, but particularly by the records of the censors, 
which the son receives in succession from the father 
and takes great care to transmit to his posterity, 
like family rites; and there are many illustrious 
men of censorian families who preserve these re- 
cords. In them I find that in the second year before 
the taking of the city there was a census of the Roman 
people, to which, as to the rest of them, there is 
affixed the date, as follows: ‘* In the consulship of 
Lucius Valerius Potitus and Titus Manlius Capi- 
tolinus, in the one hundred and nineteenth year 
after the expulsion of the kings.” So that the 
Gallic invasion, which we find to have occurred in the 
second year after the census, happened when the 
hundred and twenty years were completed. If, now, 
this interval of time is found to consist of thirty 
Olympiads, it must be allowed that the first consuls 
to be chosen entered upon their magistracy in the 
first year of the sixty-eighth Olympiad, the same 
ear that Isagoras was archon at Athens. 

LXXV. And, again, if from the expulsion of the 
kings the time is reckoned back to Romulus, the first 
ruler of the city, it amounts to two hundred and forty- 
four years. This is known from the order in which 
the kings succeeded one another and the number of 
years each of them ruled. For Romulus, the founder 


1507 B.c. 





1 τοῦ Madvig: ὑπὸ τοῦ B, ὑπὸ τῶν A. 

2 καὶ ἑκατοστῷ Bb: om. ABa. 

5. ᾿Ισαγόρου Sylburg: ἰσάγρου B, εἰς ἀγροῦ A. 
* τρῖς added by Kiessling. 


249 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


‘3 ~ 
τριάκοντα ἔτη λέγεται κατασχεῖν τὴν δυναστείαν" 
\ \ \ c 4 / > / ε 
μετὰ δὲ τὸν Ρωμύλου θάνατον ἀβασίλευτος ἡ 
πόλις γενέσθαι χρόνον ἐνιαύσιον. ἔπειτα Νόμας 
ΠΙομπίλιος αἱρεθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου τρία καὶ τετ- 
ταράκοντα ἔτη βασιλεῦσαι. Τύλλος δὲ “Οστίλιος 
\ / / A / e > are 4 
μετὰ Νόμαν δύο καὶ τριάκοντα. ὁ δ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτῳ 
βασιλεύσας Ἄγκος ἥαρκιος τέτταρα πρὸς τοῖς 
” \ A ΄ / / ε 
εἴκοσι. μετὰ δὲ ἥαρκιον Λεύκιος Ταρκύνιος ὃ 
\ / > \ A / ~ \ 
κληθεὶς Πρίσκος ὀκτὼ καὶ τριάκοντα. τοῦτον δὲ 
/ Few / 4, ‘ 
διαδεξάμενος Lepovios Τύλλιος τετταράκοντα καὶ 
/ ς Jae \ > \ / / 
τέτταρα. ὁ Lepoviov δὲ ἀνελὼν “εύκιος Ταρκύνιος 
ὁ τυραννικὸς καὶ διὰ τὴν τοῦ δικαίου ὑπεροψίαν 
\ 4 7 > ~ \ / 
κληθεὶς Σούπερβος ἕως εἰκοστοῦ καὶ πέμπτου 
προαγαγεῖν τὴν ἀρχήν. τεττάρων δὲ καὶ τετταρά- 
κοντα καὶ διακοσίων ἀναπληρουμένων ἐτῶν, ἃ 
΄ « A > / \ ~ A 
κατέσχον ot βασιλεῖς, ὀλυμπιάδων δὲ μιᾶς καὶ 
ἑξήκοντα, πᾶσα ἀνάγκη τὸν πρῶτον ἀρἕαντα τῆς 
/ « / ” / ~ « / > /, 
πόλεως ἱ Ρωμύλον ἔτει πρώτῳ τῆς ἑβδόμης ὀλυμπιά- 
δος παρειληφέναι τὴν βασιλείαν ἄ ἄρχοντος ᾿Αθήνησι 
τῆς δεκαετίας “Χάροπος ἔτος πρῶτον. τοῦτο γὰρ 
ὁ λογισμὸς τῶν ἐτῶν ἀπαιτεῖ. ὅτι δὲ τοσαῦτα 
“ ~ 7 > ” > > / 
ἕκαστος τῶν βασιλέων ἦρξεν ἔτη δι᾿ ἐκείνου δη- 
λοῦταί μοι τοῦ λόγου. 
Ἁ \ 4 \ ~ / > “ ¢ ~ 
Ta μὲν δὴ περὶ τοῦ χρόνου καθ᾽ ὃν ἡ νῦν 
> - \ > ~ 
δυναστεύουσα πόλις wKicbn τοῖς τε πρὸ ἐμοῦ 
- 7» > / 
γενομένοις εἰρημένα κἀμοὶ δοκοῦντα τοιάδ᾽ ἐστίν. 
~ “4 \ / / 
οἰκισταὶ δ᾽ αὐτῆς οἵτινες ἦσαν καὶ τίσι τύχαις 
a » 
χρησάμενοι τὴν ἀποικίαν ἔστειλαν ὅσα τε ἄλλα 
- \ 
περὶ τὴν κτίσιν ταύτην ἱστόρηται πολλοῖς μὲν 
- > 4 / 
εἴρηται καὶ διαφόρως τὰ πλεῖστα ἐνίοις, λεχθήσεται 


290 


BOOK TI. 75, 1-4 


of Rome, reigned thirty-seven years, it is said, and 
after his death the city was a year without a king. 
Then Numa Pompilius, who was chosen by the 
people, reigned forty-three years; after Numa, 
Tullus Hostilius thirty-two; and his successor, An- 
cus Marcius, twenty-four; after Marcius, Lucius 
Tarquinius, called Priscus, thirty-eight; Servius 
Tullius, who succeeded him, forty-four. And the 
slayer of Servius, Lucius Tarquinius, the tyrannical 
prince who, from his contempt of justice, was called 
Superbus, extended his reign to the twenty-fifth 
year. As the reigns, therefore, of the kings amount 
to two hundred and forty-four years or sixty-one 
Olympiads, it follows necessarily that Romulus, 
the first ruler of the city, began his reign in the first 
year of the seventh Olympiad, when Charops at 
Athens was in the first year of his ten-year term as 
archon.! For the count of the years requires this ; 
and that each king reigned the number of years 
stated is shown in that treatise of mine to which I 
have referred. 

This, therefore, is the account given by those who 
lived before me and adopted by me concerning the 
time of the settlement of the city which now rules 
supreme. As to its founders, who they were and 
by what turns of fortune they were induced to lead 
out the colony, and any other details told concerning 
its settlement, all this has been related by many, 
and the greatest part of it in a different manner by 


1751 B.c. 


1 καὶ Kiessling: ἢ O. 
251 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δὲ κἀμοὶ τὰ πιθανώτατα τῶν μνημονευομένων. 
ἔχει δὲ ὧδε: 
LXXVI. Apodrtos ἐπειδὴ παρέλαβε τὴν Ἀλβανῶν 
βασιλείαν τὸν πρεσβύτερον ἀδελφὸν Νεμέτορα τῷ 
ρ ρ μέτορα τᾷ 
~ ~ ΄ ~ > / / 
κατισχῦσαι τῆς πατρίου τιμῆς ἀπείρξας, τά τε 
ἄλλα κατὰ πολλὴν ὑπεροψίαν τῶν δικαίων ἔδρα καὶ 
τελευτῶν ἔρημον γένους τὸν οἶκον τοῦ Νεμέτορος 
ἐπεβούλευσε ποιῆσαι, τοῦ τε δίκην ὑποσχεῖν φόβῳ 
1 μὴ παυθῆναί ποτε τῆς ἀρχῆς. 


/ \ ~ > ~ ~ \ \ 
βουλευσάμενος δὲ ταῦτα ἐκ πολλοῦ πρῶτον μὲν τὸν 


\ μὰ ~ 
καὶ ἐρωτι TOV 


ει ~ / » » , 
υἱὸν τοῦ Nepétopos Αἴγεστον ἄρτι γενειάζοντα 
/ » > 7 / ~ / A 
φυλάξας ἔνθα ἐκυνηγέτει, προλοχίσας τοῦ χωρίου τὸ 
5 / » ,ὔ > A / 5 / A 
adavéotatov, ἐξελθόντα ἐπὶ θήραν ἀποκτείνει Kal 
παρεσκεύασε λέγεσθαι μετὰ τὸ ἔργον ὡς ὑπὸ λῃ- 
στῶν ἀναιρεθείη τὸ μειράκιον. οὐ μέντοι κρείττων 
\ ~ 
ἡ κατασκευαστὴ δόξα τῆς σιωπωμένης ἀληθείας 
~ \ A > 
ἐγένετο, ἀλλὰ πολλοῖς καὶ mapa τὸ ἀσφαλὲς ἐτολ- 
“- , A / / \ ws \ 
μᾶτο λέγεσθαι τὸ πραχθέν. Νεμέτωρ δὲ ἤδει μὲν 
τὸ ἔργον, λογισμῷ δὲ κρείττονι τοῦ πάθους χρώμενος 
» 5 

ἄγνοιαν ἐσκήπτετο εἰς ἀκινδυνότερον ἀναβαλέσθαι 
/ A > A λ ὔ "A 5A δὲ \ 
χρόνον τὴν ὀργὴν βουλευσάμενος. μόλιος δὲ τὰ 

~ / δ \ / 4 4 
τοῦ μειρακίου ὑπολαβὼν λεληθέναι δεύτερα τάδε 

» 7 A 7 ~ / > ’ ξς 
ἐποίει: τὴν θυγατέρα τοῦ Νεμέτορος ᾿Ϊλίαν, ὡς 

¢ / la > 

δὲ τινες γράφουσι “Ῥέαν ὄνομα, Σιλουΐαν 5 δ᾽ ἐπί- 
κλησιν, ἐν ἀκμῇ γάμου γενομένην ἱέρειαν ἀπο- 

,ὔ «ς ’ὔ ¢ \ 4 » » A , ~ 
δείκνυσιν ᾿ στίας, ws μὴ τάχιον εἰς ἀνδρὸς ἐλθοῦσα 

1 τοῦ added by Steph.?; om. Jacoby. 
2 Σιλουΐαν Glareanus: ἰουλίαν A, tAoviay B. 


252 


BOOK I. 75, 4-76, 3 


some; and I, also, shall relate the most probable 
of these stories. They are as follows: 

LXXVI. When! Amulius succeeded to the king- 
dom of the Albans, after forcibly excluding his elder 
brother Numitor from the dignity that was his by 
inheritance, he not only showed great contempt 
for justice in everything else that he did, but he 
finally plotted to deprive Numitor’s family of issue, 
both from fear of suffering punishment for his 
usurpation and also because of his desire never to 
be dispossessed of the sovereignty. Having long 
resolved upon this course, he first observed the 
neighbourhood where Aegestus, Numitor’s son, who 
was just coming to man’s estate, was wont to follow 
the chase, and having placed an ambush in the most 
hidden part of it, he caused him to be slain when he 
had come out to hunt; and after the deed was com- 
mitted he contrived to have it reported that the 
youth had been killed by robbers. Nevertheless. the 
rumour thus concocted could not prevail over the 
truth which he was trying to keep concealed, but 
many, though it was unsafe to do so, ventured to 
tell what had been done. Numitor was aware of 
the crime, but his judgment being superior to his 
grief, he affected ignorance, resolving to defer his 
resentment to a less dangerous time. And Amulius, 
supposing that the truth about the youth had been 
kept secret, set a second plan on foot, as follows: he 
appointed Numitor’s daughter, Ilia,—or, as some 
state, Rhea, surnamed Silvia,—who was then ripe 
for marriage, to be a priestess of Vesta, lest, if she 
first entered a husband’s house, she might bring 


“Cf. tavy to, 1 
253 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τέκῃ τιμωροὺς τῷ γένει. πενταετοῦς δὲ οὐκ 
ἐλάττω χρόνου ἔδει τὰς ἱερὰς κόρας ἁγνὰς διαμεῖναι 
γάμων, αἷς ἀνατέθειται τοῦ τε ἀσβέστου πυρὸς ἡ 
\ A Mu Μ / ΄ι ~ A 
φυλακὴ καὶ et τι ἄλλο θρησκεύεσθαι TH κοινῷ διὰ 
παρθένων νόμιμον ἦν. ἔπραττε δὲ μόλιος τοῦτο 
μετ᾽ ὀνομάτων καλῶν, ws τιμὴν τῷ γένει καὶ 
κόσμον περιτιθείς, οὔτε αὐτὸς εἰσηγησάμενος τὸν 
νόμον τόνδε οὔτε κοινῷ ὄντι πρῶτον ἀναγκάσας 
~ 3 5 ,ὔ ~ \ > / > » \ 
τῶν ἐν ἀξιώματι χρῆσθαι τὸν adeAdov, ἐν ἔθει δὲ 
τοῖς Αλβανοῖς καὶ ἐν καλῷ ὃν τὰς εὐγενεστάτας 
ἀποδείκνυσθαι κόρας τῆς ‘Eotias προπόλους. 6 
A / ’ / >) 5 ‘A ~ / 
δὲ Νεμέτωρ αἰσθόμενος οὐκ ἀπὸ τοῦ βελτίστου 
ταῦτα πράττοντα τὸν ἀδελφὸν ὀργὴν φανερὰν οὐκ 
ἐποιεῖτο, ἵνα μὴ τῷ δήμῳ ἀπέχθοιτο͵ ἀπόρρητον δὲ 
καὶ τοῦτο ἐφύλαττε τὸ ἔγκλημα. 
” A 5 
LXXVII. Τετάρτῳ δ᾽ ὕστερον ἔτει τὴν ᾿Ϊλίαν 
9 ~ > ς A ΕΣ ΕΣ a c ~ 
ἐλθοῦσαν εἰς ἱερὸν ἄλσος Ἄρεος ὕδατος ἁγνοῦ Ko- 
= e ᾽ὔ 
μιδῆς ἕνεκα, ᾧ πρὸς τὰς θυσίας ἔμελλε χρήσασθαι, 
βιάζεταί τις ἐν τῷ τεμένει. τοῦτον δέ τινες μὲν 
~ ’ὔ ~ 
ἀποφαίνουσι τῶν μνηστήρων eva γενέσθαι τῆς 
f > ~ “- 7ὔ 2 « δὲ » A 7A 5A 
κόρης ἐρῶντα τῆς παιδίσκης,2 ot δὲ αὐτὸν ‘ApoAov 
οὐκ ἐπιθυμίας μᾶλλον ἢ ἐπιβουλῆς ἕνεκα φραξά- 
μενόν τε ὅπλοις ὡς ἐκπληκτικώτατος ὀφθήσεσθαι 
1 πενταετοῦς Ο: τριακονταετοῦς Glareanus, Sylburg. 


2 ἐρῶντα τῆς παιδίσκης rejected by Urlichs as a gloss; 
Sauppe rejected τῆς παιδίσκης, Biicheler τῆς κόρης. 





1 Thirty years was the period required at Rome from the 
time of Numa; οὐ. ii. 67, 2. Some early editors wished 
to emend the present passage to agree with the later 
practice. 


254 


BOOK I. 76, 3-77, 1 


forth avengers for her family. These holy maidens 
who were intrusted with the custody of the perpetual 
fire and with the carrying out of any other rites 
that it was customary for virgins to perform in behalf 
of the commonwealth, were required to remain un- 
defiled by marriage for a period of not less than five! 
years. Amulius was carrying out his plan under 
specious pretences, as if he were conferring honour 
and dignity on his brother’s family ; for he was not 
the author of this law, which was a general one, nor, 
again, was his brother the first person of considera- 
tion whom he had obliged to yield obedience to it, 
but it was both customary and honourable among 
the Albans for maidens of the highest birth to be 
appointed to the service of Vesta. But Numitor, 
perceiving that these measures of his brother pro- 
ceeded from no good intention, dissembled his re- 
sentment, lest he should incur the ill-will of the people, 
and stifled his complaints upon this occasion also. 
LXXVII. The? fourth year after this, Ilia, upon 
going to a grove consecrated to Mars to fetch pure 
water for use in the sacrifices, was ravished by some- 
body or other in the sacred precinct. Some say 
that the author of the deed was one of the maiden’s 
suitors, who was carried away by his passion for 
the girl®; others say that it was Amulius himself, 
and that, since his purpose was to destroy her quite 
as much as to satisfy his passion, he had arrayed him- 
self in such armour as would render him most terrible 


2 Of. Livy i. 4, 1-3. 


*The last clause (literally, “loving the girl”) may 
well be a gloss to explain the preceding words “ one of 
the maiden’s suitors.”” See critical note. 


255 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Ψ» ‘ A - » / > > \ e 
ἔμελλε καὶ TO τῆς ὄψεως γνώριμον εἰς ἀσαφὲς ὡς 
/ > 4 / ¢ \ ~ 
μάλιστα ἐδύνατο καθιστάντα. οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι μυθο- 
~ ~ > ow” - > 
λογοῦσι τοῦ δαίμονος εἴδωλον, οὗ τὸ χωρίον ἦν, 
\ \ Μ ~ / ΄ » 
πολλὰ καὶ ἄλλα τῷ πάθει δαιμόνια ἔργα προσ- 
᾽ὔ εἰ ολί > ‘ > ὃ ‘ / > 
ἅπτοντες ' ἡλίου τε ἀφανισμὸν αἰφνίδιον καὶ ζόφον ἐν 
> ~ / \2 "ἢ Q / a Α wD 
οὐρανῷ κατασχόντα. καὶ" ὄψιν δέ, ἣν τὸ εἴδωλον 
~ , 
εἶχε, θαυμασιωτέραν μακρῷ δή Tur* κατὰ μέγεθος 
΄ > ~ ~ 
καὶ κάλλος ἀνθρώπων. φασί τε εἰπεῖν TH KOPN 
~ \ e 
παρηγοροῦντα τὴν λύπην τὸν βιασάμενον, ἐξ οὗ 
σθαι δῆλον ὅτι θεὸς ἢ δὲν ἄχθεσθ D 
γενέσθαι δῆλον ὅτι θεὸς ἦν, μηδὲν ἄχθεσθαι τῷ 
πάθει: τὸ γὰρ κοινώνημα τῶν γάμων αὐτῇ γε- 
> / ~ 
γονέναι πρὸς Tov ἐμβατεύοντα TH χωρίῳ δαίμονα, 
/ > reas. > ~ ~ / A 
τέξεσθαι δ᾽ αὐτὴν ἐκ τοῦ βιασμοῦ δύο παῖδας 
~ / 
ἀνθρώπων μακρῷ κρατίστους ἀρετὴν καὶ τὰ πολέ- 
μια. ταῦτα δὲ εἰπόντα νέφει περικαλυφθῆναι καὶ 
> \ ~ > / / A > - 84 » -΄ 
ἀπὸ γῆς ἀρθέντα φέρεσθαι δι᾿ ἀέρος ἄνω. ὅπως 
μὲν οὖν χρὴ περὶ τῶν τοιῶνδε δόξης ἔχειν, πότερον 
~ = ἂν 
καταφρονεῖν ws ἀνθρωπίνων ῥᾳδιουργημάτων εἰς 
“A ~ ~ 
θεοὺς ἀναφερομένων, μηδὲν ἂν τοῦ θεοῦ λειτούργημα 
~ / a 
τῆς ἀφθάρτου καὶ μακαρίας φύσεως ἀνάξιον ὑὗπο- 
/ 
μένοντος, ἢ Kal ταύτας παραδέχεσθαι τὰς ἱστορίας, 
~ ε / / ~ 
ὡς ἀνακεκραμένης τῆς ἁπάσης οὐσίας τοῦ κόσμου 
καὶ μεταξὺ τοῦ θείου καὶ θνητοῦ γένους τρίτης 
͵ὔ Δ \ / ~ 
τινὸς ὑπαρχούσης φύσεως, ἣν τὸ δαιμόνων φῦλον 
ἐπέχει, τοτὲ μὲν ἀνθρώποις, τοτὲ δὲ θεοῖς ἐπι- 
> - ¢ / ” A , 
μιγνύμενον, ἐξ οὗ ὁ λόγος ἔχει τὸ μυθευόμενον 
= ‘ > ~ 
ἡρώων φῦναι γένος, οὔτε καιρὸς ἐν τῷ παρόντι 
A ~ 4 ~ 
διασκοπεῖν ἀρκεῖ τε ὅσα φιλοσόφοις περὶ αὐτῶν 


1 προσάπτοντες added by Casaubon. 
2 καὶ placed here by Urlichs: after ἣν by O, Jacoby. 
8 Schwartz: τι O, Jacoby. 4Steph.?: ws Ὁ. 


256 


BOOK I. 77, 1-3 


to behold and that he also kept his features disguised 
as effectively as possible. But most writers relate a 
fabulous story to the effect that it was a spectre of 
the divinity to whom the place was consecrated; 
and they add that the adventure was attended by 
many supernatural signs, including a sudden dis- 
appearance of the sun and a darkness that spread over 
the sky, and that the appearance of the spectre was 
far more marvellous than that of a man both in 
stature and in beauty. And they say that the 
ravisher, to comfort the maiden (by which it became 
clear that he was a god), commanded her not to 
grieve at all at what had happened, since she had 
been united in marriage to the divinity of the place 
and as a result of her violation should bear two sons 
who would far excel all men in valour and warlike 
achievements. And having said this, he was 
wrapped in a cloud and, being lifted from the 
earth, was borne upwards through the air. This 
is not a proper place to consider what opinion we 
ought to entertain of such tales, whether we should 
scorn them as instances of human frailty attributed 
to the gods,—since God is incapable of any action 
that is unworthy of his incorruptible and blessed 
nature,—or whether we should admit even these 
stories, upon the supposition that all the substance 
of the universe is mixed, and that between the race 
of gods and that of men some third order of being 
exists which is that of the daemons, who, uniting 
sometimes with human beings and sometimes with 
gods, beget, it is said, the fabled race of heroes. This, 
I say, is not a proper place to consider these things, 
and, moreover, what the philosophers have said 


257 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> ΄ ε > on ’ \ \ \ > aA 
4 ἐλέχθη. ἡ δ᾽ οὖν κόρη μετὰ τὸν βιασμὸν ἀρρωστεῖν 
᾿ς - ~ / 

σκηψαμένη (τοῦτο yap αὐτῇ παρήνεσεν ἡ μήτηρ 

ἀσφαλείας τε καὶ τῶν πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς ὁσίων ἕνεκα) 

᾽ / / ~ ς ~ > \ A ~ a” 

οὐκέτι προσήει τοῖς ἱεροῖς, ἀλλὰ διὰ τῶν ἄλλων 

ἐγίνετο παρθένων, αἷς τὸ αὐτὸ προσέκειτο ἔργον, 

ὅσα λειτουργεῖν ἐκείνην ἔδει. 

LXXVIII. Apodtos δὲ εἴτε κατὰ τὴν συνείδησιν 
τῶν πραχθέντων εἴτε ὑπονοίᾳ τῶν εἰκότων προ- 
αχθεὶς ἔρευναν ἐποιεῖτο τῆς χρονίου τῶν ἱερῶν ἀπο- 
στάσεως, κατὰ τίνα γίνεται μάλιστ᾽ αἰτίαν, ἰατρούς 
τε οἷς μάλιστα ἐπίστευεν εἰσπέμπων καί, ἐπειδὴ 
τὴν νόσον αἱ γυναῖκες ἀπόρρητον ἄλλοις ᾿ ἠτιῶντο 
εἶναι, τὴν ἑαυτοῦ γυναῖκα φύλακα τῆς κόρης κατα- 

2 λιπώνΞ ws δὲ κατήγορος αὕτη τοῦ πάθους 
ἐγένετο γυναικείᾳ τεκμάρσει τὸ ἀφανὲς τοῖς ἄλλοις 
ἀνευροῦσα, τῆς μὲν παιδός, ὡς μὴ λάθῃ τεκοῦσα 

Ss \ > / ~ / λ \ > - ὃ 3 
(ἦν δὲ οὐ πρόσω τοῦ τόκου), φυλακὴν ἐποιεῖτο δι 
a > \ A / \ > \ > A 
ὅπλων: αὐτὸς δὲ καλέσας τὸν ἀδελφὸν eis τὸ 
~ / A y+ ~ 

συνέδριον τῆς Te λανθανούσης τοὺς ἄλλους φθορᾶς 
3 ~ - ~ 

μηνυτὴς γίνεται Kal ἡτιᾶτο συγκακουργεῖν TH 

A / \ A 

κόρῃ τοὺς γονεῖς ἐκέλευξ τε μὴ κρύπτειν τὸν ὃ 
> / iAN’ > / + N. / δὲ 

8 εἰργασμένον, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς μέσον ἄγειν. Νεμέτωρ δὲ 

” \ \ 

παραδόξων τε λόγων ἀκούειν ἔφη καὶ παντὸς 
~ / / > / 

ἀναίτιος εἶναι τοῦ λεγομένου χρόνον τε ἠξίου 

“- - \ \ 

βασάνου τῆς ἀληθείας ἕνεκα λαβεῖν: τυχὼν δὲ 
~ \ A ~ \ ~ 

ἀναβολῆς μόλις, ἐπειδὴ TO πρᾶγμα Tapa τῆς 

ς ε ~ > > A > / 
γυναικὸς ἔμαθεν ὡς ἡ παῖς ev ἀρχαῖς ἀφηγήσατο, 


1 ἄλλοις (Or τοῖς ἄλλοις) Naber, ἀνδράσιν Kayser: ἀνθρώποις 
Ο, Jacoby. 


258 


BOOK I. 77, 4-78, 3 


concerning them is sufficient. But, be that as it 
may, the maid after her violation feigned illness 
(for this her mother advised out of regard both for 
her own safety and for the sacred services of the 
gods) and no longer attended the sacrifices, but her 
duties were performed by the other virgins who were 
joined with her in the same ministry. 

LXXVIII. But Amulius, moved either by his 
own knowledge of what had happened or by a 
natural suspicion of the truth, began to inquire into 
her long absence from the sacrifices, in order to 
discover the real reason. ‘To this end he kept send- 
ing in to her some physicians in whom he had the 
greatest confidence; and then, since the women 
alleged that her ailment was one that must be kept 
secret from others, he left his wife to watch her. 
She, having by a woman’s marking of the signs 
discovered what was a secret to the others, informed 
him of it, and he, lest the girl should be delivered in 
secret, for she was now near her time, caused her 
to be guarded by armed men. And summoning his 
brother to the council, he not only announced the 
deflowering of the girl, of which the rest knew naught, 
but even accused her parents of being her accom- 
plices; and he ordered Numitor not to hide the 
guilty man, but to expose him. Numitor said he 
was amazed at what he heard, and protesting his 
innocence of everything that was alleged, desired 
time to test the truth of it. Having with difficulty 
obtained this delay, and being informed by his wife 
of the affair as his daughter had related it in the 





2 Kiessling: κατέλιπεν O. δ τὸν B: τὸ R. 


259 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


- tov te βιασμὸν τὸν ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ γενόμενον ἀπ- 
ἔφαινε καὶ τοὺς λεχθέντας ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ περὶ τῶν 
διδύμων παίδων λόγους διεξῆλθεν ἠξίου τε πίστιν 
ποιήσασθαι ταύτην τῶν λεγομένων, εἰ τοιοῦτος ὁ 
τῆς ὠδῖνος ἔσται γόνος, οἷον ὁ θεὸς ὑφηγήσατο. 
καὶ γὰρ ὁμοῦ τι τῷ τίκτειν εἶναι τὴν κόρην, ὥστε 
οὐκ eis! μακρὰν εἰ ῥᾳδιουργεῖ 5 φανήσεται. παρεδί- 
δου δὲ καὶ τὰς φυλαττούσας τὴν κόρην καὶ ἐλέγχων 

4 οὐδενὸς ἀφίστατο. ταῦτα λέγοντος αὐτοῦ τὸ μὲν 
τῶν συνέδρων πλῆθος ἐπείθετο, ᾿Αμόλιος δὲ οὐδὲν 
ὑγιὲς ἀπέφαινε τῶν ἀξιουμένων,2 ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ παντὸς 
ὥρμητο τρόπου τὴν ἄνθρωπον ἀπολέσαι. ἐν ὅσῳ 
δὲ ταῦτ᾽ ἐγένετο παρῆσαν οἱ τὴν ὠδῖνα φρουρεῖν 
ταχθέντες ἀποφαίνοντες ἄρρενα βρέφη δίδυμα τεκεῖν 
τὴν κόρην, καὶ αὐτίκα Νεμέτωρ μὲν ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ 
πολὺς ἦν λόγῳ τοῦ θεοῦ τε ἀποδεικνὺς τὸ ἔργον 
καὶ μηδὲν εἰς τὴν κόρην ἀναίτιον οὖσαν τοῦ πάθους 
παρανομεῖν ἀξιῶν ‘Auoriw δὲ τῶν ἀνθρωπείων τι 
μηχανημάτων καὶ τὸ περὶ τὸν τόκον ἐδόκει γενέσθαι 
παρασκευασθέντος ἑτέρου ταῖς γυναιξὶ βρέφους ἢ 
κρύφα τῶν φυλάκων ἢ συγκακουργούντων, καὶ 

ὅ πολλὰ εἰς τοῦτο ἐλέχθη. ὡς δὲ τὴν γνώμην τοῦ 
βασιλέως ἔμαθον ot σύνεδροι ἀπαραιτήτῳ τῇ * ὀργῇ 
χρωμένην ἐδικαίωσαν καὶ αὐτοὶ καθάπερ ἐκεῖνος 
ἠξίου χρήσασθαι τῷ νόμῳ κελεύοντι τὴν μὲν αἰσχύ- 
νασαν τὸ σῶμα ῥάβδοις αἰκισθεῖσαν ἀποθανεῖν, τὸ 


1 οὐκ εἰς added by Steph. 

2 εἰ ῥαδιουργεῖ Reiske: ῥαδιουργεῖν Ὁ, Jacoby. 
8 ἀξιουμένων Steph. : ἀξιολογουμένων Ο. 

4 τῇ added by Grasberger. 


260 


BOOK I. 78, 3-5 


beginning, he acquainted the council with the rape 
committed by the god and also related what the god 
had said concerning the twins, and asked that his 
story should be believed only if the fruit of her travail 
should prove to be such as the god had foretold ; 
for the time of her delivery was near at hand, so 
that it would not be long, if he were playing the 
rogue, before the fact would come to light. More- 
over, he offered to put at their disposal for examina- 
tion the women who were watching his daughter, and 
he was ready to submit to any and every test. As 
he spoke thus the majority of the councillors were 
persuaded, but Amulius declared that his demands 
were altogether insincere, and was bent on destroying 
the girl by every means. While this was taking place, 
those who had been appointed to keep guard over 
Ilia at the time of her delivery came to announce that 
she had given birth to male twins. And at once 
Numitor began to urge at length the same arguments, 
showing the deed to be the work of the god and de- 
manding that they take no unlawful action against 
his daughter, who was innocent of her condition. 
On the other hand, Amulius thought that even in 
connexion with her delivery there had been some 
human trickery and that the women had provided 
another child, either unknown to the guards or with 
their connivance, and he said much more to the 
same purport. When the councillors found that the 
king’s decision was inspired by implacable anger, 
they, too, voted, as he demanded, that the law should 
be carried out which provided that a Vestal who 
suffered herself to be defiled should be scourged 
with rods and put to death and her offspring thrown 


261 


bo 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δὲ γεννηθὲν εἰς τὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ βάλλ εσθαι ῥεῖθρον 
νῦν μέντοι ζώσας κατορύττεσθαι τὰς τοιαύτας ὃ 
τῶν ἱερῶν ayopever! νόμος. 

LXXIX. Μέχρι μὲν δὴ τούτων οἱ πλεῖστοι τῶν 
συγγραφέων τὰ αὐτὰ ἢ μικρὸν παραλλάττοντες, οἱ 
\ > \ A / ς 5 >) \ A ~ 5 , 
μὲν ἐπὶ TO μυθωδέστερον, οἱ δ᾽ ἐπὶ TO TH ἀληθείᾳ 
>) \ ~ 5 ͵ὔ A \ ~ ἀ ~ -- 
ἐοικὸς μᾶλλον, ἀποφαίνουσι, περὶ δὲ τῶν ἑξῆς δια- 
φέρονται. ol μὲν γὰρ εὐθὺς ἀναιρεθῆναι λέγουσι 
τὴν κόρην, οἱ δ᾽ ἐν εἱρκτῇ φυλαττομένην ἀδήλῳ 
διατελέσαι δόξαν τῷ δήμῳ παρασχοῦσαν ἀφανοῦς 
θανάτου. ἐπικλασθῆναι δὲ tov? μόλιον εἰς τοῦτο 
ἱκετευούσης τῆς θυγατρὸς χαρίσασθαι τὴν ἀνεψιὰν 
αὐτῇ: ἦσαν δὲ σύντροφοί τε καὶ ἡλικίαν ἔχουσαι 
τὴν αὐτὴν ἀσπαζόμεναί τε ἀλλήλας ὡς ἀδελῴας. 

,ὔ oy / 4 ἊΝ "A 5A / > 4 
χαριζόμενον οὖν ταύτῃ τὸν μόλιον, μόνη δ᾽ ἦν 
αὐτῷ θυγάτηρ, θανάτου μὲν ἀπολῦσαι τὴν ᾿Ϊλίαν, 
φυλάττειν δὲ καθείρξαντα ἐν ἀφανεῖ: λυθῆναι δὲ 
αὐτὴν ἀνὰ χρόνον “μολίου τελευτήσαντος. περὶ 
μὲν οὖν τῆς ᾿Ιλίας οὕτω διαλλάττουσιν at τῶν 

~ 7 λό δ᾽ Μ « ἀλ A 
παλαιῶν γραφαί, λόγον ἔχουσιν ὡς ηθεῖς 
ἑκάτεραι. διὰ τοῦτο κἀγὼ μνήμην ἀμφοτέρων 
ἐποιησάμην, ὁποτέρᾳ δὲ χρὴ πιστεύειν αὐτός τις 
εἴσεται τῶν ἀναγνωσομένων. 

\ δὲ ~ > ~ oy FY / Κό 

περὶ δὲ τῶν ἐκ τῆς ίας γενομένων Κόιντος 
τ ’ὔ 
μὲν Φάβιος ὁ Πίκτωρ λεγόμενος, ᾧ “εύκιός τε 
Κίγκιος καὶ Κάτων [Π]όρκιος καὶ Πείσων Kad- 
~ / € / 
πούρνιος Kat τῶν ἄλλων συγγραφέων ot πλείους 
ψ / / 3 e A 4 -A λί 
ἠκολούθησαν, γέγραφε: ὡς κελεύσαντος ApodAtou 
1 ἀγορεύει B: διαγορεύει R, 
27ov Ο : om. Sintenis, Jacoby. 


262 


BOOK I. 78, 5-79, 4 


into the current of the river. To-day, however, the 
sacred law ordains that such offenders shall be buried 
alive. 

LXXIX. Up! to this point the greater part of 
the historians give the same account or differ but 
slightly, some in the direction of what is legendary, 
others of what is more probable ; but they disagree 
in what follows. Some say that the girl was put to 
death immediately ; others that she remained in a 
secret prison under a guard, which caused the people 
to believe that she had been put to death secretly. 
The latter authors say that Amulius was moved to 
do this when his daughter begged him to grant her 
the life of her cousin ; for, having been brought up 
together and being of the same age, they loved each 
other like sisters. Amulius, accordingly, to please 
her,—for she was his only daughter,—saved Ilia 
from death, but kept her confined in a secret prison ; 
and she was at length set at liberty after the death 
of Amulius. Thus do the accounts of the ancient 
authors vary concerning Ilia, and yet both opinions 
carry with them an appearance of truth; for this 
reason I, also, have mentioned them both, but each 
of my readers will decide for himself which to 
believe. 

But concerning the babes born of Ilia, Quintus 
Fabius, called Pictor, whom Lucius Cincius, Porcius 
Cato, Calpurnius Piso and most of the other his- 
torians have followed, writes thus: By tbe order 


1 Cf. Livy i. 4, 3-9. 





3 γέγραφε Ῥ] 85 : τῆι γραφῆι O, 


~J 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ ΄ / > / / ~ ¢ ~ 
τὰ βρέφη λαβόντες ἐν σκάφῃ κείμενα τῶν ὑπηρετῶν 
τινες ἔφερον ἐμβαλοῦντες εἰς τὸν ποταμὸν ἀπέχοντα 
τῆς πόλεως ἀμφὶ τοὺς ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι σταδίους. ἐπεὶ 
δὲ ἐγγὺς ἐγένοντο καὶ εἶδον ἔξω τοῦ γνησίου ῥείθρου 

~ >? 
τὸν TéBepw ὑπὸ χειμώνων συνεχῶν ἐκτετραμμένον 
> \ / 7, > \ ~ / ~ 
εἰς τὰ πεδία, καταβάντες ἀπὸ τοῦ IladAavtiov τῆς 
κορυφῆς ἐπὶ τὸ προσεχέστατον ὕδωρ (οὐ γὰρ ἔτι 
προσωτέρω χωρεῖν οἷοίτε ἦσαν), ἔνθα πρῶτον ἡ 
τοῦ ποταμοῦ πλήμη τῆς ὑπωρείας ἥπτετο, τίθενται 
τὴν σκάφην ἐπὶ τοῦ ὕδατος. ἡ δὲ μέχρι μέν τινος 
ἐνήχετο, ἔπειτα τοῦ ῥείθρου κατὰ μικρὸν ὕπο- 
χωροῦντος ἐκ τῶν περιεσχάτων ᾿ λίθου προσπταίσει 
- > / A / A \ \ 
περιτραπεῖσα ἐκβάλλει τὰ βρέφη. τὰ μὲν δὴ 
΄- a / 
κνυζούμενα κατὰ τοῦ τέλματος ἐκυλινδεῖτο, λύκαινα 
δέ τις ἐπιφανεῖσα νεοτόκος σπαργῶσα τοὺς μαστοὺς 
ὑπὸ γάλακτος ἀνεδίδου τὰς θηλὰς τοῖς στόμασιν 
~ ~ e / 
αὐτῶν Kal τῇ γλώττῃ Tov πηλόν, ᾧ κατάπλεοι 
> « 
ἦσαν, ἀπελίμα. ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τυγχάνουσιν οἱ 
- > / \ > / > \ 7 ” 
νομεῖς ἐξελαύνοντες τὰς ἀγέλας ἐπὶ νομήν (ἤδη 
γὰρ ἐμβατὸν ἦν τὸ χωρίον) καί τις αὐτῶν ἰδὼν 
>’ / \ 
τὴν λύκαιναν ws ἠσπάζετο τὰ βρέφη τέως μὲν 
> / ~ 
ἀχανὴς ἦν ὑπό τε θάμβους καὶ ἀπιστίας τῶν 
θ / Ἃ ” > > λθ \ 2 \ AA / -“ 
ewpoupevwy ἔπειτ᾽ ἀπελθὼν" καὶ συλλέξας ὅσους 
A 
ἐδύνατο πλείστους τῶν ἀγχοῦ νεμόντων (οὐ γὰρ 
ἐπιστεύστο λέγων) ἄγει τοὖργον αὐτὸ θεασομένους. 
ὡς δὲ κἀκεῖνοι πλησίον ἐλθόντες ἔμαθον τὴν μὲν 
σ \ > ¢ A 
ὥσπερ τέκνα TeEpléTovcay,®? τὰ δ᾽ ὡς μητρὸς 

1 περιεσχάτων Naber, πέριξ ἐσχάτων Sylburg, περὶ τὰ ἔσχατα 
Meutzner: περιέσχατα A, περὶ ἔσχατα B, Jacoby, 

2 ἔπειτ᾽ ἀπελθὼν Kiessling: ἔπειτα ἐλθὼν O, 

5 Sylburg: περισπῶσαν Ο. 

264 


BOOK I. 79, 4-7 


of Amulius some of his servants took the babes 
in an ark and carried them to the river, distant about 
a hundred and twenty stades from the city, with the 
intention of throwing them into it. But when they 
drew near and perceived that the Tiber, swollen by 
continual rains, had left its natural bed and over- 
flowed the plains, they came down from the top of 
the Palatine hill! to that part of the water that lay 
nearest (for they could no longer advance any far- 
ther) and set down the ark upon the flood where it 
washed the foot of the hill. The ark floated for 
some time, and then, as the waters retired by degrees 
from their extreme limits, it struck against a stone 
and, overturning, threw out the babes, who lay 
whimpering and wallowing in the mud. Upon this, 
a she-wolf that had just whelped appeared and, her 
udder being distended with milk, gave them her 
paps to suck and with her tongue licked off the mud 
with which they were besmeared. In the mean- 
time the herdsmen happened to be driving their 
flocks forth to pasture (for the place was now be- 
come passable) and one of them, seeing the wolf 
thus fondling the babes, was for some time struck 
dumb with astonishment and disbelief of what he 
saw. Then going away and getting together as 
many as he could of his fellows who kept their 
herds near at hand (for they would not believe what 
he said), he led them to see the sight themselves. 
When these also drew near and saw the wulf caring 


for the babes as if they had been her young and the 


1From this point the word Παλλάντιον will be rendered 
** Palatine hill’ instead of ‘* Pallantium,’’ unless the con- 
text shows clearly that the village itself is meant. 


265 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> / / / ~ C5 δὰ, 3 / 
ἐξεχόμενα, δαιμόνιόν τι χρῆμα ὁρᾶν ὑπολαβόντες 
> ~ 
ἐγγυτέρω προσήεσαν ἀθρόοι δεδιττόμενοι βοῇ τὸ 
θηρίον. ἡ δὲ λύκαινα οὐ μάλα aypiaivovea τῶν 
> θ / ~ "ὃ ἀλλ᾽ ε 4A 46 
“ ρώπὼν Τῇ TWpoTcoow, “a pce ἐ ἀρ ς ap age id 
ἀποστᾶσα τῶν βρεφῶν ἠρέμα καὶ κατὰ πολλὴν 
> , = ~ ΒΡ ὦ sRiy at? Les 7, 
ἀλογίαν τοῦ ποιμενικοῦ ὁμίλου ἀπήει. καὶ ἦν γάρ 
> \ > / > ~ ¢ \ ~ “ / 
τις οὐ πολὺ ἀπέχων ἐκεῖθεν ἱερὸς χῶρος ὕλῃ βαθείᾳ 
συνηρεφὴς καὶ πέτρα κοίλη πηγὰς ἐνιεῖσα, ἐλέγετο 
δὲ [Tavos εἶναι τὸ νάπος, καὶ βωμὸς ἦν αὐτόθι τοῦ 
θεοῦ. εἰς τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον ἐλθοῦσα ἀποκρύπτεται. 
A \ Ss Μ ᾽ / / \ \ Μ > 
τὸ μὲν οὖν ἄλσος οὐκέτι διαμένει, TO δὲ ἄντρον, ἐξ 
οὗ ἡ λιβὰς ἐκδίδοται, τῷ Π͵Ἕ.αλλαντίῳ προσῳκοδο- 
μημένον δείκνυται κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ τὸν ἱππόδρομον 
φέρουσαν ὅδόν, καὶ τέμενός ἐστιν αὐτοῦ πλησίον, 
»᾿ > \ ~ ~ 4 4 ,ὔ ‘\ 
ἔνθα εἰκὼν κεῖται τοῦ πάθους λύκαινα παιδίοις δυσὶ 
τοὺς μαστοὺς ἐπίσχουσα, χαλκᾶ ποιήματα παλαιᾶς 
ἐργασίας. ἦν δὲ τὸ χωρίον τῶν σὺν Εὐάνδρῳ ποτὲ 
οἰκισάντων αὐτὸ ᾿Αρκάδων ἱερὸν ὡς λέγεται. 
“-“ \ 
ὡς δὲ ἀπέστη τὸ θηρίον αἴρουσιν οἱ νομεῖς τὰ 
~ \ 
βρέφη σπουδὴν ποιούμενοι τρέφειν ὡς θεῶν αὐτὰ 
σώζεσθαι βουλομένων. ἦν δέ τις ἐν αὐτοῖς συο- 
΄ » \ > Ἁ 
φορβίων βασιλικῶν ἐπιμελούμενος ἐπιεικὴς ἀνὴρ 





1 Compare the description of the Lupercal already given 
in chap. 32. 

2 The cave became a shrine and received some sort of 
architectural adornment, which must have included at 
least a dignified entrance. The Lupercal is named in 
the Monumentum Ancyranum (4, 2) in a list of public 
buildings repaired by Augustus. 

83 The statue here mentioned is doubtless the one erected 
by Cn. and Q. Ogulnius near the Ficus Ruminalis in 


266 


BOOK I. 79, 7-9 


babes clinging to her as to their mother, they thought 
they were beholding a supernatural sight and ad- 
vanced in a body, shouting to terrify the creature. 
The wolf, however, far from being provoked at the 
approach of the men, but as if she had been tame, 
withdrew gently from the babes and went away, 
paying little heed to the rabble of shepherds. Now 
there was not far off a holy place, arched over by a 
dense wood, and a hollow rock from which springs 
issued ; the wood was said to be consecrated to Pan, 
and there was an altar there to that god.! To this 
place, then, the wolf came and hid herself. The 
grove, to be sure, no longer remains, but the cave 
from which the spring flows is still pointed out, built 
up ” against the side of the Palatine hill on the road 
which leads to the Circus, and near it is a sacred 
precinct in which there is a statue commemorating 
the incident ; it represents a she-wolf suckling two 
infants, the figures being in bronze and of ancient 
workmanship.* This spot is said to have been a 
holy place of the Arcadians who formerly settled 
there with Evander. 

As soon as the beast was gone the herdsmen took 
up the babes, and believing that the gods desired their 
preservation, were eager to bring them up. There 
was among them the keeper of the royal herds of 


295 B.c. (Livy x. 23). Another similar group stood on 
the summit of the Capitol, and was struck by lightning in 
658B.c. The wolf of this second group is almost certainly the 
famous one still preserved in the Palazzo dei Conservatori, 
since the animal’s hind legs show the effects of lightning ; 
the wolf is dated about 600 B.c., but the infants are a modern 
restoration, 


267 


10 


11 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Φ iA 1 Μ Δ > ~ / A Pa > 
αυστύλος ' ὄνομα, ὃς ἐν TH πόλει κατὰ δή τι ἀναγ- 
΄ » / > Δ / e \ ~ > / 
καῖον ἐγεγόνει καθ᾽ ὃν χρόνον ἡ φθορὰ τῆς ᾿Ιλίας 
καὶ ὃ τόκος ἠλέγχετο, καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα κομιζομένων 
ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν τῶν βρεφῶν τοῖς φέρουσιν αὐτὰ 

A / 4 oe / τ > \ « A 
κατὰ θείαν τύχην ἅμα διεληλύθει τὴν αὐτὴν ὁδὸν 
> \ / pat «Δ σ ~ ΝΜ 
εἰς τὸ Παλλάντιον ἰών: ὃς ἥκιστα τοῖς ἄλλοις 
> ~ 
καταφανὴς γενόμενος ὡς ἐπίσταταί τι τοῦ πράγ- 
ματος ἀξιώσας αὑτῷ συγχωρηθῆναι τὰ βρέφη λαμ- 
βάνει τε αὐτὰ παρὰ τοῦ κοινοῦ καὶ φέρων ὡς τὴν 
γυναῖκα ἔρχεται. τετοκυῖαν δὲ καταλαβὼν καὶ 
ἀχθομένην ὅτι νεκρὸν αὐτῇ τὸ βρέφος ἦν παρα- 
- / \ 516 ς λέ θ A / 
μυθεῖταί τε καὶ δίδωσιν ὑποβαλέσθαι τὰ παιδία 
πᾶσαν ἐξ ἀρχῆς διηγησάμενος τὴν κατασχοῦσαν 
αὐτὰ τύχην. αὐξομένοις δὲ αὐτοῖς ὄνομα τίθεται 
~ \ ς 4 ~ \ ¢ ~ 4 \ > 
τῷ μὲν Ῥωμύλον, τῷ δὲ “P&pov. ot δὲ avdpw- 
θέντες γίνονται κατά τε ἀξίωσιν μορφῆς Kat φρονή- 
ματος ὄγκον οὐ συοφορβοῖς καὶ βουκόλοις ἐοικότες, 
5 » “ »Μ > / \ > / 
ἀλλ᾽ οἵους ἄν τις ἀξιώσειε τοὺς ἐκ βασιλείου τε 
φύντας γένους καὶ ἀπὸ δαιμόνων σπορᾶς γενέσθαι 
νομιζομένους, ὡς ἐν τοῖς πατρίοις ὕμνοις ὑπὸ 
ς / ” \ ~ 10 / δ᾽ > a Ss 
Ρωμαίων ἔτι καὶ viv ἄδεται. βίος δ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἦν 
\ \ / b] \ > + \ \ 
βουκολικὸς καὶ δίαιτα αὐτουργὸς ἐν ὄρεσι τὰ πολλὰ 
/ \ / \ / \ Ψ / 
πηξαμένοις διὰ ξύλων καὶ καλάμων σκηνὰς αὐτορό- 
1 ΞΈΘΡΗ. (cf. Φαυστῖνος, 84, 3): φαιστύλος Ο (and similarly 
elsewhere), Jacoby. 





1 This meaning (on the analogy of such words as avravépos, 
αὐτόκλαδος, αὐτόρριζος) seems to be the one Tequired here. 
The only meaning given in the lexicons, “ self-covered ”’ 
or “roofed by nature,’’ would imply huts depending for 
their roofs on natural shelters, such as overhanging rocks 
or overarching trees,—in other words, huts technically 


268 


BOOK TI. 79, 9-11 


swine, whose name was Faustulus, an upright man, 
who had been in town upon some necessary business 
at the time when the deflowering of Ilia and her 
delivery were made public. And afterwards, when 
the babes were being carried to the river, he had by 
some providential chance taken the same road to 
the Palatine hill and gone along with those who 
were carrying them. This man, without giving the 
least intimation to the others that he knew anything 
of the affair, asked that the babes might be delivered 
to him, and having received them by general con- 
sent, he carried them home to his wife. And 
finding that she had just given birth to a child and 
was grieving because it was still-born, he comforted 
her and gave her these children to substitute in 
its place, informing her of every circumstance of 
their fortune from the beginning. And as they grew 
older he gave to one the name of Romulus and to the 
other that of Remus. When they came to be men, 
they showed themselves both in dignity of aspect 
and elevation of mind not like swineherds and neat- 
herds, but such as we might expect those to be who 
are born of royal race and are looked upon as the 
offspring of the gods; and as such they are still 
celebrated by the Romans in the hymns of their 
country. But their life was that of herdsmen, and 
they lived by their own labour, generally upon the 
mountains in huts which they built, roofs and all,} 


roofless. But the thatched roof of the “* hut of Romulus ’”’ 
was to the Romans one of its most striking features ; see 
next note. καλάμων, here rendered “ reeds,’’ in accordance 
with its usual meaning, is also used sometimes for “‘ straw,”’ 
which may be what Dionysius intended. 


269 


12 


13 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


e » \ > 2 > “A 
gous: ὧν ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ ἦν τις τοῦ Παλλαντίου 
2 ‘ yas A \ ¢ / / 2 / 
ἐπὶ τῆς πρὸς τὸν ἱππόδρομον στρεφούσης 5 λαγόνος 
« 7 4 
᾿ωμύλου λεγομένη, ἣν φυλάττουσιν ἱερὰν οἷς τού- 
> \ 
των ἐπιμελὲς οὐδὲν ἐπὶ TO σεμνότερον ἐξάγοντες, 
>] / / ~ 
εἰ δέ τι πονήσειεν ὑπὸ χειμῶνος ἢ χρόνου TO 
A 9 ΄ ~ > ~ 
λεῖπον ἐξακούμενοι καὶ τῷ πρόσθεν ἐξομοιοῦντες 
» 
εἰς δύναμιν. 
> \ δὲ > \ \ > / » , > 
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀμφὶ τὰ ὀκτωκαίδεκα ἔτη γεγονότες ἦσαν 
5» ul / ~ ~ ~ / τ 
ἀμφίλογόν τι περὶ τῆς νομῆς αὐτοῖς γίνεται πρὸς 
\ / / a A A > - 
τοὺς Νεμέτορος βουκόλους, ot περὶ τὸ Αὐεντῖνον 
ΝΜ 3 \ ~ / / > \ 
ὄρος ἀντικρὺ τοῦ IladXavtiov κείμενον εἶχον τὰς 
/ ᾽ = \ > / ε / \ 
βουστάσεις. ἡτιῶντο δὲ ἀλλήλους ἑκάτεροι θαμινὰ 
ἢ τὴν μὴ προσήκουσαν ὀργάδα κατανέμειν ἢ τὴν 
κοινὴν μόνους διακρατεῖν ἢ ἢ ὅ τι δήποτε τύχοι. ἐκ 
δὲ τῆς ἁψιμαχίας ταύτης ἐγένοντο πληγαί ποτε διὰ 
~ \ \ κ᾿ 
χειρῶν, εἶτα δι᾿ ὅπλων. τραύματα δὲ πολλὰ πρὸς 
~ « ~ / ’ὔ 
τῶν μειρακίων λαβόντες οἱ τοῦ Νεμέτορος καί 
~ / ‘ ~ 
τινας καὶ ἀπολέσαντες τῶν σφετέρων καὶ τῶν 
’ὔ 
χωρίων ἤδη κατὰ κράτος ἐξειργόμενοι παρεσκευ- 
/ / \ 2 im > / rv / δὴ 
ἄζοντο δόλον τινὰ ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς. προλοχίσαντες δὴ 
~ ‘ / ~ 
τῆς φάραγγος τὸ ἀφανὲς καὶ συνθέμενοι τοῖς 
~ ~ > / \ ς 
λοχῶσι τὰ μειράκια τὸν τῆς ἐπιθέσεως καιρὸν οἱ 


1 χοῦ Kiessling: ἐκ τοῦ O. : 
3 ἐπὶ ris .. στρεφούσης Steph.: τῆς . . . ἐπιστρεφούσης O. 





1 The present passage gives us our most detailed account 
of the casa Romuli. Plutarch (Rom. 20) adds the detail 
that it stood near the scalae Caci, a landmark on the south- 


270 


BOOK I. 79, 11-13 


out of sticks and reeds. One of these, called the hut 
of Romulus,’ remained even to my day on the flank 
of the Palatine hill which faces towards the Circus, 
and it is preserved holy by those who have charge of 
these matters; they add nothing to it to render it 
more stately, but if any part of it is injured, either 
by storms or by the lapse of time, they repair the 
damage and restore the hut as uearly as possible 
to its former condition. 

When Romulus and Remus were about eighteen 
years of age, they had some dispute about the pas- 
ture with Numitor’s herdsmen, whose herds were 
quartered on the Aventine hill, which is over against 
the Palatine. They frequently accused one another 
either of grazing the meadow-land that did not belong 
to them or of monopolizing that which belonged to 
both in common, or of whatever the matter chanced 
to be. From this wrangling they had recourse some- 
times to blows and then to arms. Finally Numitor’s 
men, having received many wounds at the hands of 
the youths and lost some of their number and being 
at last driven by force from the places in dispute, 
devised a stratagem against them. They placed 
an ambuscade in the hidden part of the ravine and 
having concerted the time of the attack with those 
who lay in wait for the youths, the rest in a body 


west corner of the Palatine hill. There was also another 
casa Romuli on the Capitoline, probably a replica of the 
first. Vitruvius (ii. 1, 5), after mentioning the primitive 
custom of constructing roofs out of reeds, brushwood or 
straw, cites the hut of Romulus on the Capitoline as a 
good example of the ancient practice. Cf. Virgil (Aen. viii. 
654), Romuleoque recens horrebat regia culmo ; and Ovid’s 
similar description of the original temple of Vesta (Fasti 
vi. 261 f.). 


271 


14 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


λοιποὶ κατὰ πλῆθος ἐπὶ τὰ pavdpedpata αὐτῶν 
7 > / «ς / \ > \ / 
νύκτωρ ἐπέβαλον. “PawpvdAos μὲν οὖν τὸν χρόνον 
τοῦτον ἐτύγχανεν ἅμα τοῖς ἐπιφανεστάτοις τῶν 
κωμητῶν πεπορευμένος εἴς τι χωρίον Καινίνην " 
ὀνομαζόμενον ἱερὰ ποιήσων ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ πάτρια" 
“Ρῶμος δὲ τὴν ἔφοδον αὐτῶν αἰσθόμενος ἐξεβοήθει 
> ~ > ~ 
λαβὼν τὰ ὅπλα διὰ ταχέων ὀλίγους τῶν ἐκ τῆς 
/ / > Δ / ͵7ὔ 
κώμης φθάσαντας καθ᾽ ἕν γενέσθαι παραλαβών. 
> - » 7 » / > \ / ¢ / 
κἀκεῖνοι od δέχονται αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ φεύγουσιν ὑπαγό- 
” > ~ « / > 
μενοι ἔνθα ἔμελλον ev καλῷ ὑποστρέψαντες ἐπι- 
¢ ~ ~ 
θήσεσθαι: ὁ δὲ ἹΡῶμος κατ᾽ ἄγνοιαν τοῦ μηχανή- 
Μ ~ > 4 > \ / 
ματος ἄχρι πολλοῦ διώκων αὐτοὺς παραλλάττει 
τὸ λελοχισμένον χωρίον, κἀν τούτῳ ὅ τε λόχος 
ἀνίσταται καὶ οἱ φεύγοντες ὑποστρέφουσι. κυκλω- 
4 \ > \ \ - > / / 
σάμενοι δὲ αὐτοὺς καὶ πολλοῖς ἀράττοντες λίθοις 
λαμβάνουσιν ὑποχειρίους. ταύτην γὰρ εἶχον ἐκ 
τῶν δεσποτῶν τὴν παρακέλευσιν, ζῶντας αὐτοῖς 
τοὺς νεανίσκους κομίσαι. οὕτω μὲν δὴ χειρωθεὶς 
ὁ ἹΡῶμος ἀπήγετο. 
LXXX. Ὡς δὲ Τουβέρων Aids δεινὸς ἀνὴρ 
καὶ περὶ τὴν συναγωγὴν τῆς ἱστορίας ἐπιμελὴς 
γράφει, προειδότες οἱ τοῦ Νεμέτορος θύσοντας τὰ 
Λύκαια τοὺς νεανίσκους τῷ [Πανὶ τὴν ᾿Φρκαδικὴν 
ὡς Εὔανδρος κατεστήσατο θυσίαν ἐνήδρευσαν τὸν 
- ~ ς ~ 
καιρὸν ἐκεῖνον τῆς ἱερουργίας, ἡνίκα χρῆν τοὺς περὶ 
τὸ Παλλάντιον οἰκοῦντας τῶν νέων ἐκ τοῦ Λυκαίου 


1 Καινίνην (as in ii. 32, 35, and Steph. Byz.) Cary, Καίνιναν 
Cobet, Jacoby: καινιμᾶν A, καινιμὰν B. 





1Cf. Livy i. 5, 1-3. 2 See p. 25, n. 2. 
9.» 


BOOK 1. 79, 13-80, 1 


attacked the others’ folds by night. No wit hap- 
pened that Romulus, together with the chief men of 
the village, had gone at the time to a place called 
Caenina to offer sacrifices for the community accord- 
ing to the custom of the country; but Remus, 
being informed of the foe’s attack, hastily armed 
himself and with a few of the villagers who had 
already got together went out to oppose them. And 
they, instead of awaiting him, retired, in order to 
draw him to the place where they intended to face 
about and attack him to advantage. Remus, being 
unaware of their stratagem, pursued them for a long 
distance, till he passed the place where the rest 
lay in ambush; thereupon these men rose up and 
at the same time the others who had been fleeing 
faced about. And having surrounded Remus and 
his men, they overwhelmed them with a shower of 
stones and took them prisoners; for they had re- 
ceived orders from their masters to bring the youths 
to them alive. Thus Remus was captured and led 
away. 

LXXX. But! Aelius Tubero,? a shrewd man and 
careful in collecting his historical data, writes that 
Numitor’s people, knowing beforehand that the 
youths were going to celebrate in honour of Pan the 
Lupercalia,® the Arcadian festival as instituted by 
Evander, set an ambush for that moment in the 
celebration when the youths living near the Palatine 
were, after offering sacrifice, to proceed from the 


3 For a detailed discussion of the Lupercalia the reader 
is referred to Sir James Frazer’s note on Ovid’s Fasti 11. 267 
(Vol. ii. pp. 327 ff.; condensed in his Loeb Classical 
Library edition, pp. 389 ἢ). 


273 
VOL. I. L 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τεθυκότας περιελθεῖν δρόμῳ τὴν κώμην γυμνοὺς 
ὑπεζωσμένους τὴν αἰδῶ ταῖς δοραῖς τῶν νεοθύτων. 
τοῦτο δὲ καθαρμόν τινα τῶν κωμητῶν πάτριον 
ἐδύνατο, ὡς καὶ νῦν ἔτι δρᾶται. ἐν δὴ τούτῳ τῷ 
χρόνῳ τοὺς ἱεροποιοὺς νεανίσκους οἱ βουκόλοι 
λοχήσαντες κατὰ τὸ στενόπορον τῆς ὁδοῦ, ἐπειδὴ 
~ ~ ς 
τὸ πρῶτον τάγμα τὸ σὺν τῷ “Ῥώμῳ κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς 
, , ~ > \ Ῥ Δ A ~ 1 Μ 
ἐγένετο, τῶν ἀμφὶ Ρωμύλον τε καὶ τῶν ᾿ ἄλλων 
ὑστεριζόντων (τριχῇ γὰρ ἐνενέμηντο καὶ ἐκ διαστή- 
ματος ἔθεον) οὐ περιμείναντες τοὺς λοιποὺς ὁρμῶσιν 
ἐπὶ τοὺς πρώτους ἐμβοήσαντες ἀθρόοι καὶ περι- 
4 ΕΣ « \ 5 / e A / Φ > 
στάντες ἔβαλλον οἱ μὲν ἀκοντίοις, ot δὲ λίθοις, ot ὃ 
ὡς ἕκαστοί τι διὰ χειρὸς εἶχον. οἱ δ᾽ ἐκπλαγέντες 
τῷ παραδόξῳ τοῦ πάθους καὶ ἀμηχανοῦντες ὅ τι 
δράσειαν πρὸς ὡπλισμένους ἄνοπλοι μαχόμενοι κατὰ 
πολλὴν εὐπέτειαν ἐχειρώθησαν. ὁ μὲν οὖν “Ῥῶμος 
ἐπὶ τοῖς πολεμίοις γενόμενος οὕτως, εἴθ᾽ ὡς ὁ 
vA 7 / ᾿] \ » 5 7 
Φάβιος παραδέδωκε, δέσμιος εἰς τὴν Ἄλβαν ἀπής- 
«ς 4 > ~) \ \ \ A > \ 
yeto. ἱΡωμύλος δ᾽ ἐπειδὴ τὸ περὶ τὸν ἀδελφὸν 
+ 7 , » A a” ~ A 3 
ἔγνω πάθος, διώκειν εὐθὺς ᾧετο δεῖν τοὺς ἀκ- 
μαιοτάτους ἔχων τῶν νομέων, ὡς ἔτι κατὰ τὴν 
ὁδὸν ὄντα καταληψόμενος τὸν Ρῶμον ἀποτρέπεται 
~ ~ ~ A 
δ᾽ ὑπὸ τοῦ Φαυστύλου. δρῶν yap αὐτοῦ τὴν σπου- 
δὴν μανικωτέραν οὖσαν οὗτος 3 νομισθεὶς 6 πατήρ, 
a? τὸν ἔμπροσθεν χρόνον ἀπόρρητα ποιούμενος 
~ ~ "4 
τοῖς μειρακίοις διετέλεσεν, ὡς μὴ θᾶττον ὁρμήσωσι 
παρακινδυνεῦσαί τι πρὶν ἐν τῷ κρατίστῳ τῆς ἀκμῆς 
\ - > \ 
γενέσθαι, τότε δὴ" πρὸς τῆς ἀνάγκης βιασθεὶς 


1: τῶν added by Kiessling. 
2 οὗτος added here by Jacoby, after ὁρῶν yap by Schnelle. 


274 


BOOK I. 80, 1-3 


Lupercal and run round the village naked, their loins 
girt with the skins of the victims just sacrificed. 
This ceremony signified a sort of traditional purifica- 
tion of the villagers, and is still performed even to 
this day. On this occasion, then, the herdsmen lay 
in wait in the narrow part of the road for the youths 
who were taking part in the ceremony, and when the 
first band with Remus came abreast of them, that 
with Romulus and the rest being behind (for they 
were divided into three bands and ran at a distance 
from one another), without waiting for the others 
they set up a shout and all rushed upon the first 
group, and, surrounding them, some threw darts at 
them, others stones, and others whatever they could 
lay their hands on. And the youths, startled by the 
unexpected attack and at a loss how to act, fighting 
unarmed as they were against armed men, were easily 
overpowered. Remus, therefore, having fallen into 
the hands of the enemy in this manner or in the way 
Fabius relates, was being led away, bound, to Alba. 
When Romulus heard of his brother’s fate, he 
thought he ought to follow immediately with the 
stoutest of the herdsmen in the hope of overtaking 
Remus while he was still on the road, but he was 
dissuaded by Faustulus. For seeing that his haste 
was too frenzied, this man, who was looked upon as 
the father of the youths and who had hitherto kept 
everything a secret from them, lest they should ven- 
ture upon some hazardous enterprise before they were 
in their prime, now at last, compelled by necessity, 


3 ἃ added by Kiessling. 
4 δὴ Schnelle: δὲ O. 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


4 μονωθέντι τῷ “Ῥωμύλῳ λέγει. μαθόντι δὲ τῷ 
νεανίσκῳ πᾶσαν ἐξ ἀρχῆς τὴν κατασχοῦσαν αὐτοὺς 
/ ~ > / 
τύχην τῆς TE μητρὸς οἶκτος εἰσέρχεται καὶ Nepe- 
τορος φροντίς, καὶ πολλὰ βουλευσαμένῳ μετὰ τοῦ 
Φαυστύλου τῆς μὲν αὐτίκα ὁρμῆς ἐπισχεῖν ἐδόκει, 
πλείονι δὲ παρασκευῇ δυνάμεως χρησάμενον ὅλον 
ἀπαλλάξαι τὸν οἶκον τῆς “AjoAlov παρανομίας 
κίνδυνόν τε τὸν ἔσχατον ὑπὲρ τῶν μεγίστων ἄθλων 
~ ~ σ 
ἀναρρῖψαι, πράττειν δὲ μετὰ τοῦ μητροπάτορος ὅ 
τι ἂν ἐκείνῳ δοκῇ. 
LXXXI. ‘Qs δὲ ταῦτα κράτιστα εἶναι ἔδοξε 
/ \ / A € « / 
συγκαλέσας τοὺς κωμήτας ἅπαντας 6 “Ῥωμύλος 
\ \ > A ” > / A / 
καὶ δεηθεὶς εἰς τὴν Ἄλβαν ἐπείγεσθαι διὰ ταχέων 
A 
μὴ κατὰ τὰς αὐτὰς πύλας ἅπαντας μηδ᾽ ἀθρόους 
εἰσιόντας, μή τις ὑπόνοια πρὸς τοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει 
ε / 
γένηται, καὶ περὶ τὴν ἀγορὰν ὑπομένοντας ἑτοίμους 
~ ~ >? \ 
εἶναι δρᾶν τὸ κελευόμενον, ἀπήει πρῶτος εἰς τὴν 
ε \ \ « ~ »” > \ 

2 πόλιν. οἱ δὲ τὸν “Ρῶμον ἄγοντες, ἐπειδὴ κατ- 
/ > 3% \ / ’ Ὁ ς ’ὔ 
ἔστησαν ἐπὶ τὸν βασιλέα, tas τε ὕβρεις ἁπάσας, 

> A ~ 
ὅσας ἦσαν ὑβρισμένοι πρὸς τῶν μειρακίων, κατη- 
~ > / 
yopovv Kal τοὺς τραυματίας σφῶν ἐπεδείκνυσαν, 
/ 
τιμωρίας εἰ μὴ τεύξονται καταλείψειν προλέγοντες 
\ / > / \ “-“ / \ 
τὰ βουφόρβια. ᾿Αμόλιος δὲ τοῖς χωρίταις κατὰ 
πλῆθος ἐληλυθόσι χαρίζεσθαι βουλόμενος καὶ τῷ 
\ > ΄ ~ ca 
Νεμέτορι (παρὼν yap ἐτύγχανε συναγανακτῶν τοῖς 
A 
πελάταις) εἰρήνην TE ἀνὰ τὴν χώραν σπεύδων εἶναι 
καὶ ἅμα καὶ τὸ αὔθαδες τοῦ μειρακίου, ὡς ἀκατά- 
> > ~ / > ς / / 
πληκτον ἦν ev τοῖς λόγοις, δι᾿ ὑποψίας λαμβάνων 
\ / ~ 
καταψηφίζεται τὴν δίκην: τῆς δὲ τιμωρίας τὸν 
276 


BOOK I. 80, 4-81, 2 


took Romulus aside and told him everything. 
When the youth heard every circumstance of their 
fortune from the beginning, he was touched both 
with compassion for his mother and with solicitude 
for Numitor. And after taking much counsel with 
Faustulus, he decided to give up his plan for an 
immediate attack, but to get ready a larger force, 
in order to free his whole family from the lawlessness 
of Amulius, and he resolved to risk the direst peril for 
the sake of the greatest rewards, but to act in concert 
with his grandfather in whatever the other should 
see fit to do. 

LXXXI. This! plan having been decided upon 
as the best, Romulus called together all the inhabit- 
ants of the village and after asking them to hasten 
into Alba immediately, but not all by the same 
gates nor in a body, lest the suspicions of the citizens 
should be aroused, and then to stay in the market- 
place and be ready to do whatever should be ordered, 
he himself set out first for the city. In the meantime 
those who had carried off Remus brought him be- 
fore the king and complained of all the outrageous 
treatment they had received from the youths, 
producing their wounded, and threatening, if they 
found no redress, to desert their herds. And Amulius, 
desiring to please both the countrymen, who had 
come in great numbers, and Numitor (for he happened 
to be present and shared the exasperation of his 
retainers), and longing to see peace throughout the 
country, and at the same time suspecting the 
boldness of the youth, so fearless was he in his 
answers, gave judgment against him; but he left his 


1 For chaps. 81-83 cf. Livy i. 5, 4-6, 2. 
277 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ - ΄ > ~ 
Νεμέτορα ποιεῖ κύριον, εἰπών ὡς τῷ δράσαντι δεινὰ 
\ > ~ » \ Μ ‘ ~ Ἃ ~ 
τὸ ἀντιπαθεῖν οὐ πρὸς ἄλλου τινὸς μᾶλλον ἢ τοῦ 
/ ~ 
πεπονθότος ὀφείλεται. ἐν ὅσῳ δ᾽ ὁ “Ῥῶμος ὑπὸ 
~ ~ N. / 5A »” ὃ ὃ 4 
τῶν τοῦ Νεμέτορος βουκόλων ἤγετο δεδεμένος τε 
9 / A - - 
ὀπίσω τὼ χεῖρε καὶ πρὸς τῶν ἀγόντων ἐπικερτο- 
/ > ~ =~ 
μούμενος, ἀκολουθῶν ὁ Νεμέτωρ τοῦ τε σώματος 
\ > , > 7 e \ \ \ 
τὴν εὐπρέπειαν ἀπεθαύμαζεν, ws πολὺ τὸ βασιλικὸν 
4 \ - \ - 
εἶχε, καὶ τοῦ φρονήματος τὴν εὐγένειαν ἐνεθυμεῖτο, 
Δ \ \ \ 
ἣν Kat παρὰ τὰ δεινὰ διέσωσεν od πρὸς οἶκτον οὐδὲ 
7 - - ~ A 
λιπαρήσεις, ws ἅπαντες ἐν ταῖς τοιαῖσδε ποιοῦσι τύ- 
/ ~ \ 
χαις, τραπόμενος, ἀλλὰ σὺν εὐκόσμῳ σιωπῇ πρὸς" 
A / > 
τὸν μόρον ἀπιών. wes δ᾽ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν ἀφίκοντο 
~ A 
μεταστῆναι τοὺς ἄλλους κελεύσας μονωθέντα τὸν 
« ~ , >? ~ 
Pé&pov ἤρετο τίς εἴη καὶ τίνων, ὡς οὐκ ἂν ἐκ τῶν 
~ » 
τυχόντων γε ἄνδρα τοιοῦτον γενόμενον. εἰπόντος 
\ ae ~ 4 
δὲ τοῦ “Ῥώμου τοσοῦτον εἰδέναι μόνον κατὰ πύστιν 
~ / Ὁ \ > ~ 7 > / 
τοῦ τρέφοντος, ὅτι σὺν ἀδελφῷ διδύμῳ ἐκτεθείη 
/ > / ~ \ ~ 
βρέφος εἰς νάπην εὐθὺς ἀπὸ γονῆς Kal πρὸς TOV 
5 > \ > ‘ 
νομέων ἀναιρεθεὶς ἐκτραφείη, βραχὺν ἐπισχὼν 
~ ~ ΝΜ ~ 
χρόνον εἴτε ὑποτοπηθείς τι τῶν ἀληθῶν εἴτε τοῦ 
\ ~ / 
δαίμονος ἄγοντος εἰς τοὐμφανὲς TO πρᾶγμα λέγει 
\ > / ce "O \ Io od \ / oo “Ῥῶ 
πρὸς αὐτόν᾽ τι μὲν ET ἐμοὶ γέγονας, ὦ Pape, 
~ a n ὃ \ e ‘ AA ~ 
παθεῖν 6 Te ἂν δικαιώσω, Kal ws περὶ πολλοῦ 
~ \ \ 
ποιήσαιντ᾽ ἂν οἱ κομίσαντές σε δεῦρο πολλὰ Kat 
\ ,ὔ > A ~ ᾽ὃ A ὃ - \ ἰὃ / 
δεινὰ παθόντες ἀποθανεῖν, οὐδὲν δεῖ πρὸς εἰδότα 
\ Μ \ 
λέγειν. εἰ δέ σε θανάτου te Kat ἄλλου παντὸς 
΄ Ss 9 > / / ‘ 
ἐκλυσαίμην κακοῦ, ap’ av εἰδείης μοι χάριν καὶ deo- 
‘\ > ~ ΝΜ 3 ’ 33 
μένῳ ὑπουργήσειας ὃ κοινὸν ἀμφοῖν ἔσται ἀγαθόν ; 


1 πρὸς Β: ἐπὶ R. 
218 


BOOK I. 81, 2-5 


punishment to Numitor, saying that the one who had 
done an injury could be punished by none so justly 
as by the one who had suffered it. While Numitor’s 
herdsmen were leading Remus away with his hands 
bound behind him and mocking him, Numitor fol- 
lowed and not only admired his grace of body, so 
much was there that was kingly in his bearing, 
but also observed his nobility of spirit, which he 
preserved even in distress, not turning to lamenta- 
tions and entreaties, as all do under such afflictions, 
but with a becoming silence going away to his fate. 
As soon as they were arrived at his house he ordered 
all the rest to withdraw, and Remus being left alone, 
he asked him who he was and of what parents ; 
for he did not believe such a man could be meanly 
born. Remus answered that he knew this much 
only from the account he had received from the 
man who brought him up, that he with his twin 
brother had been exposed in a wood as soon as they 
were born and had then been taken up by the 
herdsmen and reared by them. Upon which 
Numitor, after a short pause, either because he sus- 
pected something of the truth or because Heaven 
was bringing the matter to light, said to him: 
“1 need not inform you, Remus, that you are in 
my power to be punished in whatever way I may see 
fit, and that those who brought you here, having 
suffered many grievous wrongs at your hands, 
would give much to have you put to death. All 
this you know. But if I should free you from death 
and every other punishment, would you show your 
gratitude and serve me when I desire your assistance 
in an affair that will conduce to the advantage of us 


279 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> πὶ 
ὃ ἀποκριναμένου δὲ τοῦ μειρακίου ὁπόσα τοὺς ἐν 
/ ~ 
ἀπογνώσει βίου κειμένους ἡ τοῦ σωθήσεσθαι 
> ~ / / A“ 
ἐλπὶς τοῖς κυρίοις τούτου λέγειν καὶ ὑπισχνεῖσθαι 
> / 7 / 
ἐπαίρει, λῦσαι κελεύσας αὐτὸν 6 Νεμέτωρ καὶ 
7 > A > A / \ e ~ / 
πάντας ἀπελθεῖν ἐκποδὼν φράζει τὰς αὑτοῦ τύχας, 
ε > / > A > A Ἅ 5 ,ὔ ~ 
ὡς ᾿Αμόλιος αὐτὸν ἀδελφὸς ὧν ἀπεστέρησε τῆς 
βασιλείας ὀρφανόν te! τέκνων ἔθηκε, τὸν μὲν ἐπὶ 
/ 4 Q ’ \ > > ~ 
θήρᾳ κρύφα διαχειρισάμενος, τὴν δ᾽ ἐν εἱρκτῇ δε- 
ὃ / / / Μ e / ΄ 
εμένην φυλάττων, τά τε ἄλλα ὁπόσα δεσπότης 
χρώμενος δούλῳ διατελεῖ.3 
LXXXI. Ταῦτ᾽ εἰπὼν καὶ πολὺν θρῆνον ἅμα 
τοῖς λόγοις εὐξαχεάμενος ἠξίου τιμωρὸν τοῖς κατ᾽ 
οἶκονΞ αὑτοῦ" κακοῖς" τὸν “Ρῶμον γενέσθαι. 
~ / 
ἀσμένως δὲ ὑποδεξαμένου Tov λόγον τοῦ μειρακίου 
καὶ παραυτίκαϑ τάττειν αὑτὸν ἐπὶ τὸ ἔργον ἀξιοῦντος 
ἐπαινέσας ὁ NV. εἐμέτωρ τὴν προθυμίαν, ᾿ἣ ᾿ Τῆς μὲν πρά- 
Eews,” ἔφη, “ τὸν καιρὸν "ἐγὼ ταμιεύσομαι, σὺ δὲ 
τέως πρὸς τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἀπόρρητον ἅπασι τοῖς ἄλλοις 
3 ’ ,ὔ 4 / ~ \ \ / 
ἀγγελίαν πέμψον, ὅτι cwly Te δηλῶν καὶ διὰ ταχέων 
~ > 
2 αὐτὸν ἥκειν ἀξιῶν. ἐκ δὲ τούτου πέμπεταί τις 
» A 
ἐξευρεθείς, ὃς ἐδόκει  ὑπηρετήσειν, Kal περιτυχὼν 
> / ~ δ + 4 / ~ \ 
ov πρόσω τῆς πόλεως ὄντι “Ῥωμύλῳ διασαφεῖ τὰς 
\ ” na 
ἀγγελίας - 6 δὲ περιχαρὴς γενόμενος ἔρχεται σπουδῇ 
- > 
πρὸς Νεμέτορα καὶ περιπλακεὶς ἀμφοῖν ἀσπάζεται 
μὲν πρῶτον, ἔπειτα φράζει τὴν ἔκθεσιν σφῶν καὶ 
εν ~ > 
τροφὴν καὶ τἄλλα ὅσα παρὰ τοῦ Φαυστύλου ἐπύθετο. 
1τε Meutzner: δὲ Ο. 
2 διατελεῖ added by Sintenis, λωβᾶται by Meutzner, Jacoby. 
8 κατ᾽ οἶκον Kiessling: κατοίκοις ABa, κατ᾽ οἴκους Bb 
4 αὑτοῦ Kiessling: αὐτοῦ AB. 
5 κακοῖς added by Kiessling; Reiske had suggested κακοῖς 
for κατοίκοις of the MSS. 


280 


BOOK I. 81, 6-82, 2 


both ?” The youth, having in answer said every- 
thing which the hope of life prompts those who are in 
despair of it to say and promise to those on whom 
their fate depends, Numitor ordered him to be 
unbound. And commanding everybody to leave the 
place, he acquainted him with his own misfortunes— 
how Amulius, though his brother, had deprived him 
of his kingdom and bereft him of his children, having 
secretly slain his son while he was hunting and keep- 
ing his daughter bound in prison, and in all other 
respects continued to treat him as a master would 
treat his slave. 

LXXXII. Having spoken thus and accompanied 
his words with many lamentations, he entreated 
Remus to avenge the wrongs of his house. And 
when the youth gladly embraced the proposal and 
begged him to set him at the task immediately, 
Numitor commended his eagerness and said : “* I my- 
self will determine the proper time for the enterprise ; 
but do you meanwhile send a message privately to 
your brother, informing him that you are safe and 
asking him to come here in all haste.” Thereupon 
a man who seemed likely to serve their purpose 
was found and sent; and he, meeting Romulus not 
far from the city, delivered his message. Romulus 
was greatly rejoiced at this and went in haste to 
Numitor; and having embraced them both, he first 
spoke words of greeting and then related how he and 
his brother had been exposed and brought up and 


8 παραυτίκα Jacoby: πάλαι O. 
1 After ἐδόκει Meineke supplied εὖ; Reiske proposed to 
read ὃς προθύμως καὶ πιστῶς ἐδόκει ὑπηρετήσειν. 


281 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ε΄ \ 4 \ > ~ -“ 4 
tots δὲ βουλομένοις τε Kai οὐ πολλῶν ἵνα πιστεύσειαν 
τεκμηρίων δεομένοις καθ᾽ ἡδονὰς τὸ λεγόμενον Fv 
> \ ὃ \ > / > ᾽ὔ > / / 
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνέγνωσαν ἀλλήλους αὐτίκα συνετάττοντο 
\ 
καὶ διεσκόπουν ὅστις ἔσται τρόπος ἢ καιρὸς εἰς τὴν 
> > - φ' ~ Ss 
ἐπίθεσιν ἐπιτήδειος. ἐν ᾧ δὲ οὗτοι περὶ ταῦτ᾽ ἦσαν 
e > 
ὁ Φαυστύλος ἀπάγεται πρὸς Auddov. δεδοικὼς yap 
\ ~ 
μὴ οὐ πιστὰ δόξῃ τῷ Νεμέτορι λέγειν ὁ Ῥωμύλος 2 
ἄνευ σημείων ἐμφανῶν μεγάλου πράγματος μηνυτὴς 
\ ~ ~ ~ 
γενόμενος, TO γνώρισμα THs ἐκθέσεως τῶν βρεφῶν 
\ / > \ »Ὰ / Ὁ“ 90.» » 
τὴν σκάφην ἀναλαβὼν ὀλίγον ὕστερον ἐδίωκεν εἰς 
τὴν πόλιν. διερχόμενον δ᾽ αὐτὸν τὰς πύλας ταρα- 
χωδῶς πάνυ καὶ περὶ πολλοῦ ποιούμενον μηδενὶ 


3 τῶν φυλάκων τις 


ποιῆσαι καταφανὲς τὸ φερόμενον 
/ 4, \ / > / / \ \ 
καταμαθών (ἦν δὲ πολεμίων ἐφόδου δέος καὶ τὰς 
πύλας οἱ μάλιστα πιστευόμενοι πρὸς τοῦ βασιλέως 
> / / \ \ \ σ 
ἐφρούρουν) συλλαμβάνει τε καὶ τὸ κρυπτὸν ὅ τι 
δήποτ᾽ ἦν καταμαθεῖν ἀξιῶν ἀποκαλύπτει βίᾳ τὴν 
/ e \ \ / > / \ ‘\ 
περιβολήν. ὡς δὲ τὴν σκάφην ἐθεάσατο καὶ τὸν 
» μὲ > / 557 ΄ / ἐ 
ἄνθρωπον ἔμαθεν ἀπορούμενον, ἠξίου λέγειν τίς ἡ 
A \ / A 5A ~ A ~ > / 4 
ταραχὴ καὶ τί TO βούλημα τοῦ μὴ φανερῶς εἰσφέρειν 
- ~ > A 
σκεῦος οὐδὲν δεόμενον ἀπορρήτου φορᾶς. ev δὲ 
~ / 
τούτῳ πλείους τῶν φυλάκων συνέρρεον Kal τις 
~ \ > > / Ἁ 
αὐτῶν γνωρίζει τὴν σκάφην αὐτὸς ἐν ἐκείνῃ τὰ 
\ \ / ‘ 
παιδία κομίσας ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν καὶ φράζει πρὸς 
A / 
τοὺς παρόντας. ot δὲ συλλαβόντες τὸν Φαυστύλον 
͵΄ “- \ 
ἄγουσιν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸν βασιλέα καὶ διηγοῦνται τὰ 
1 ἦν added by Steph. 
2 Sylburg: φαιστύλος ΑΒ. 


282 


BOOK I. 82, 2-5 


all the other circumstances he had learned from 
Faustulus. The others, who wished his story might 
be true and needed few proofs in order to believe 
it, heard what he said with pleasure. And as soon 
as they knew one another they proceeded to consult 
together and consider the proper method and occa- 
sion for making their attack. While they were thus 
employed, Faustulus was brought before Amulius. 
For, fearing lest the information given by Romulus 
might not be credited by Numitor, in an affair of 
so great moment, without manifest proofs, he soon 
afterwards followed him to town, taking the ark 
with him as evidence of the exposing of the babes. 
But as he was entering the gates in great confusion, 
taking all possible pains to conceal what he carried, 
one of the guards observed him (for there was fear 
of an incursion of the enemy and the gates were being 
guarded by those who were most fully trusted by 
the king) and laid hold of him ; and insisting upon 
knowing what the concealed object was, he forcibly 
threw back his garment. As soon as he saw the ark 
and found the man embarrassed, he demanded to 
know the cause of his confusion and what he meant 
by not carrying in openly an article that required 
no secrecy. In the meantime more of the guards 
flocked to them and one of them recognized the ark, 
having himself carried the children in it to the river ; 
and he so informed those who were present. Upon 
this they seized Faustulus, and carrying him to the 
king himself, acquainted him with all that had 





3 φερόμενον Gelenius, στεγόμενον Reiske: λεγόμενον O. 
4 εἰσφέρειν B: ἐκφέρειν A. 


283 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ 4 
6 γενόμενα. ‘Apuddtos δὲ ἀπειλῇ βασάνων καταπληξά- 
A » > \ / \ > / ¢ 4 
μενος τὸν ἄνθρωπον, εἰ μὴ λέξοι Tas ἀληθείας ἑκών, 
~ ~ ~ ~ 5 
πρῶτον μὲν εἰ ζῶσιν οἱ παῖδες ἤρετο: ὡς δὲ τοῦτ 
ἔμαθε, τῆς σωτηρίας αὐτοῖς ὅστις ὁ τρόπος ἐγένετο" 
διηγησαμένου δὲ αὐτοῦ πάντα ὡς ἐπράχθη, “Aye 
δή, φησὶν 6 βασιλεύς, ἐπειδὴ ταῦτ᾽ ἀληθεύσας ἔχεις, 
~ 7 - ’ 
φράσον ὅπου νῦν ἂν εὑρεθεῖεν. οὐ yap ἔτι δίκαιοί 
~ ” ” 
εἰσιν ἐν βουκόλοις Kat ἄδοξον Biov! ζῆν ἔμοιγε ὄντες 
- ~ 229 
συγγενεῖς, ἄλλως τε καὶ θεῶν προνοίᾳ σωζόμενοι. 
LXXXIII. Φαυστύλος δὲ τῆς ἀλόγου πραότητος 
e / A \ ~ » 8 Li ~ ’ 
ὑποψίᾳ κινηθεὶς μὴ φρονεῖν αὐτὸν ὅμοια τοῖς λόγοις 
> / τ cc ς \ AQ s/s > ᾿ ey, 
ἀποκρίνεται ὧδε: “ Οἱ μὲν παῖδές εἰσιν ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσι 
~ or > / / > \ > » / 
βουκολοῦντες, ὅσπερ ἐκείνων βίος, ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἐπέμφθην 
παρ᾽ αὐτῶν τῇ μητρὶ δηλώσων ἐν αἷς εἰσι τύχαις" 
/ \ / / > / / 
ταύτην δὲ παρά σοι φυλάττεσθαι ἀκούων δεήσεσθαι 
τῆς σῆς θυγατρὸς ἔμελλον, ἵνα με πρὸς αὐτὴν ἀγάγοι. 
\ \ / ” De WV / 7] 
τὴν δὲ σκάφην ἔφερον ἵν᾽ ἔχω δεικνύναι τεκμήριον 
> \ “ ~ / ~ s > \ / / 
ἐμφανὲς ἅμα τοῖς λόγοις. νῦν οὖν, ἐπεὶ δέδοκταί 
σοι τοὺς νεανίσκους δεῦρο κομίσαι, χαίρω τε καὶ 
7 7 / \ > / / \ 2 
πέμψον οὕστινας βούλει adv ἐμοί. δείξω μὲν οὖν 
΄ > ~ \ - / > > ~ > A 
τοῖς ἐλθοῦσι τοὺς παῖδας, φράσουσι δ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐκεῖνοι 
\ / 39 « \ \ a ? ” > A 
2 τὰ παρά cov.” ὁ μὲν δὴ ταῦτ᾽ ἔλεγεν ἀναβολὴν 
εὑρέσθαι βουλόμενος τοῖς παισὶ τοῦ θανάτου καὶ 
A >) \ > / A a” > A > 
ἅμα αὐτὸς ἀποδράσεσθαι τοὺς ἄγοντας, ἐπειδὰν ἐν 
- ” ΄ > / > / \ A 
τοῖς ὄρεσι γένηται, ἐλπίσας. ᾿Αμόλιος δὲ τοῖς 


1 ἄδοξον βίον Usener: ἀδόξῳ βίῳ O. 
284 


BOOK I. 82, 6-83, 2 


passed. Amulius, having terrified the man by the 
threat of torture if he did not willingly tell the truth, 
first asked him if the children were alive; and learning 
that they were, he desired to know in what manner they 
had been preserved. And when the other had given 
him a full account of everything as it had happened, 
the king said: “‘ Well then, since you have spoken 
the truth about these matters, say where they may 
now be found ; for it is not right that they who are 
my relations should any longer live ingloriously among 
herdsmen, particularly since it is due to the provi- 
dence of the gods that they have been preserved.” 
LXXXIII. But Faustulus, suspecting from the 
king’s unaccountable mildness that his intentions 
were not in harmony with his professions, answered 
him in this manner: “* The youths are upon the moun- 
tains tending their herds, which is their way of 
life, and I was sent by them to their mother to give 
her an account of their fortunes; but, hearing that 
she was in your custody, I was intending to ask your 
daughter to have me brought to her. And I was 
bringing the ark with me that I might support my 
words with a manifest proof. Now, therefore, since 
you have decided to have the youths brought 
here, not only am 1 glad, but I ask you to send such 
persons with me as you wish. I will point out to 
them the youths and they shall acquaint them with 
your commands.” This he said in the desire to 
discover some means of delaying the death of the 
youths and at the same time in the hope of making 
his own escape from the hands of those who were 
conducting him, as soon as he should arrive upon the 
mountains. And Amulius speedily sent the most 


285 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


, ~ e / > / 4 “A 
πιστοτάτοις τῶν ὁπλοφόρων ἐπιστείλας κρύφα, ovs 
xv ¢ \ > ~ / / ¢ ? \ 
av 6 συοφορβὸς αὐτοῖς δείξῃ συλλαβόντας ws αὐτὸν 
3, 3 / \ / ~ \ 4 
ἄγειν, ἀποστέλλει διὰ ταχέων. ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξά- 
μενος αὐτίκα γνώμην ἐποιεῖτο καλέσας τὸν ἀδελ- 

1 > A) Say ” “ x” > τι A 
gov ἐν φυλακῇ ἀδέσμῳ ἔχειν, ἕως av εὖ θῆται τὰ 
/ \ ’ \ e ee ae ’ > / e A 
παρόντα, Kal αὐτὸν ws ἐπ᾽ ἄλλο δή τι ἐκάλει. ὁ δὲ 
ἀποσταλεὶς ἄγγελος εὐνοίᾳ τε τοῦ κινδυνεύοντος καὶ 
ἐλέῳ τῆς τύχης ἐπιτρέψας κατήγορος γίνεται Νεμέ- 
τορι τῆς Apodiov γνώμης. ὁ δὲ τοῖς παισὶ δηλώσας 
τὸν κατειληφότα κίνδυνον αὐτοὺς καὶ παρακελευσά- 
μενος ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς γενέσθαι παρῆν ἄγων ὧπλι- 
/ 2 A / ~ ΝΜ ~ A 
σμένους ἐπὶ τὰ βασίλεια τῶν Te ἄλλων πελατῶν καὶ 
ἑταίρων καὶ θεραπείας πιστῆς χεῖρα οὐκ ὀλίγην. 
ἧκον δὲ καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν συνελθόντες εἰς τὴν 
πόλιν ἐκλιπόντες τὴν ἀγορὰν ἔχοντες ὑπὸ ταῖς περι- 
βολαῖς ξίφη κεκρυμμένα, στῖφος καρτερόν. βιασά- 
μενοι δὲ τὴν εἴσοδον ἀθρόᾳ ὁρμῇ πάντες οὐ πολλοῖς 
ὁπλίταις φρουρουμένην ἀποσφάττουσιν εὐπετῶς 
> / \ \ ~ \ + ad. / 
‘Aportov καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο τὴν ἄκραν καταλαμβάνον- 
ται. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν τοῖς περὶ Φάβιον εἴρηται. 
LXXXIV. ἭἝτεροι δὲ οὐδὲν τῶν μυθωδεστέρων 
“ ~ ~ > 
ἀξιοῦντες ἱστορικῇ γραφῇ προσήκειν τήν TE ἀπό- 
θεσιν τὴν τῶν βρεφῶν οὐχ ὡς ἐκελεύσθη τοῖς 
ὑπηρέταις γενομένην ἀπίθανον εἶναί φασι, καὶ 
~ > ~ 
τῆς AvKaivns τὸ τιθασόν, ἣ τοὺς μαστοὺς € πεῖχε 
΄ ~ > 
τοῖς παιδίοις, ws δραματικῆς μεστὸν ἀτοπίας 


1 δραματικῆς B: δραστικῆς R. 





1 Literally “‘ under guard without chains,’’ probably a 
translation of the Latin libera custodia. In later times 


286 


BOOK I. 83, 2-84, 1 


trustworthy of his guards with secret orders to seize 
and bring before him the persons whom the swine- 
herd should point out to them. Having done this, 
he at once determined to summon his brother and 
keep him under mild guard ! till he had ordered the 
present business to his satisfaction, and he sent for 
him as if for some other purpose ; but the messenger 
who was sent, yielding both to his good-will toward 
the man in danger and to compassion for his fate, 
informed Numitor of the design of Amulius. And 
Numitor, having revealed to the youths the danger 
that threatened them and exhorted them to show 
themselves brave men, came to the palace with 
a considerable band of his retainers and friends and 
loyal servants. These were joined by the country- 
men who had entered the city earlier and now came 
from the market-place with swords concealed under 
their clothes, a sturdy company. And having by 
a concerted attack forced the entrance, which was 
defended by only a few heavy-armed troops, they 
easily slew Amulius and afterwards made themselves 
masters of the citadel. Such is the account given 
by Fabius. 

LXXXIV. But others, who hold that nothing 
bordering on the fabulous has any place in historical 
writing, declare that the exposing of the babes by 
the servants in a manner not in accordance with their 
instructions is improbable, and they ridicule the 
tameness of the she-wolf that suckled the children as 
a story full of melodramatic absurdity. In place of 


persons of rank were often thus kept under surveillance in 
their own houses or in the house of a magistrate. 


287 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


2 διασύρουσιν: ἀντιδιαλλαττόμενοι δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα 
/ e « / > a \ > / v 
λέγουσιν ὡς ὁ Νεμέτωρ, ἐπειδὴ τὴν ᾿ΪΙλίαν ἔγνω 
κύουσαν, ἕτερα παρασκευασάμενος παιδία νεογνὰ 
/ ΄ 3. A \ / \ \ \ 
διηλλάξατο τεκούσης αὐτῆς τὰ βρέφη καὶ τὰ μὲν 
> ~ / A / \ Qn > ͵ὕ 
ὀθνεῖα δέδωκε τοῖς φυλάττουσι τὰς ὠδῖνας ἀποφέρειν, 
εἴτε χρημάτων τὸ πιστὸν τῆς χρείας αὐτῶν πριά- 
μενος εἴτε διὰ γυναικῶν τὴν ὑπαλλαγὴν μηχανησά- 
\ > A A > / “ / ’ὔ 
μενος, καὶ αὐτὰ λαβὼν Apuorios ὅτῳ δή τινι τρόπῳ 
a > ~ 
ἀναιρεῖ - τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ιλίας γενόμενα περὶ παντὸς 
ποιούμενος ὁ μητροπάτωρ διασώζεσθαι δίδωσι τῷ 
3 Φαυστύλῳ. τὸν δὲ Φαυστύλον τοῦτον Αρκάδα μὲν 
> ͵ \ ͵, a “- \ 27 
εἶναί φασι τὸ γένος ἀπὸ τῶν σὺν Εὐάνδρῳ, κατοι- 
~ \ A \ / 2 / Μ ~ 
κεῖν δὲ περὶ τὸ [Π͵}αλλάντιον ἐπιμέλειαν ἔχοντα τῶν 
> / / / θ δὲ Ν ͵ \ 
ApoAiov κτημάτων. χαρίσασθαι δὲ Νεμέτορι τὴν 
> \ ~ “ὃ LO A ~ 1 θ / ΝΜ 
ἐκτροφὴν τῶν παίδων τἀδελφῷ ' πειθόμενον ὄνομα 
Φαυστίνῳ τὰς περὶ τὸν Adevtivov τρεφομένας τοῦ 
‘ / / 
4 Nepétopos ἀγέλας ἐπιτροπεύοντι" τήν τε τιθηνησα- 
μένην τὰ παιδία καὶ μαστοὺς ἐπισχοῦσαν οὐ λύ- 
5 > A ~ 
καιναν εἶναί φασιν, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ εἰκὸς γυναῖκα τῷ 
~ / »” e 
Φαυστύλῳ συνοικοῦσαν “αυρεντίαν ὄνομα, ἧ δη- 
~ σ 
μοσιευούσῃ ποτὲ τὴν τοῦ σώματος ὥραν οἱ περὶ 
» 
τὸ Παλλάντιον διατρίβοντες ἐπίκλησιν ἔθεντο τὴν 
4 > » A ~ ‘E. / Tic a 
Δούπαν ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο ᾿λληνικόν τε καὶ ἀρχαῖον 


1 Hertlein: ἀδελφῷ O. 
2 λούππαν AB (and similarly just below). 





10C0f. Livy i. 4, 7. lupa is found in various Latin 
authors in the sense of “‘ prostitute,’’ and lupanar meant 
“* brothel.”’ 


288 


BOOK I. 84, 24 


this they give the following account of the matter : 
Numitor, upon learning that Ilia was with child, 
procured other new-born infants and when she had 
given birth to her babes, he substituted the former 
in place of the latter. Then he gave the suppositi- 
tious children to those who were guarding her at the 
time of her delivery to be carried away, having either 
secured the loyalty of the guards by money or con- 
trived this exchange by the help of women; and 
when Amulius had received them, he made away 
with them by some means or other. As for the 
babes that were born of Ilia, their grandfather, who 
was above all things solicitous for their preservation, 
handed them over to Faustulus. This Faustulus, 
they say, was of Arcadian extraction, being descended 
from those Arcadians who came over with Evander ; 
he lived near the Palatine hill and had the care οἱ 
Amulius’ possessions, and he was prevailed on by 
his brother, named Faustinus, who had the over- 
sight of Numitor’s herds that fed near the Aventine 
hill, to do Numitor the favour of bringing up the 
children. They say, moreover, that the one who 
nursed and suckled them was not a she-wolf, but, 
as may well be supposed, a woman, the wife of 
Faustulus, named Laurentia, who, having formerly 
prostituted her beauty, had received from the 
people living round the Palatine hill the nickname 
of Lupa.’ This is an ancient Greek? term applied 


2 It would seem as if ‘“‘Greek’’ must be an error here for 
“Latin.”? Not even the Greek equivalent of lupa (λύκαινα) 
is found used in this sense. Hesychius’ gloss, λύπτα (for 
λύππα 1) ἑταίρα, πόρνη, may well have been taken from some 
Roman history. 


289 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


2 A ~ / > / / ° a 
ἐπὶ ταῖς μισθαρνούσαις τἀφροδίσια τιθέμενον, at 
νῦν εὐπρεπεστέρᾳ κλήσει ἑταῖραι προσαγορεύονται. 
3 ~ a 
ἀγνοοῦντας δέ τινας αὐτὸ πλάσαι τὸν περὶ τῆς 
λυκαίνης μῦθον, ἐπειδὴ κατὰ τὴν γλῶτταν, ἣν τὸ 
Λατίνων ἔθνος φθέγγεται, λούπα καλεῖται τοῦτο τὸ 
θηρίον. ἡνίκα δὲ τῆς ἐν τῷ γάλακτι τροφῆς ἀπηλ- 
/ ~ ~ 
Adyn τὰ παιδία, δοθῆναι πρὸς τῶν τρεφόντων εἰς 
/ / b] \ > \ ~ / 
Γαβίους πόλιν οὐ μακρὰν ἀπὸ τοῦ “Παλλαντίου 
/ e ¢ 7 / 3 / > - 
κειμένην, ὡς ᾿Ελλάδα παιδείαν ἐκμάθοιεν, κἀκεῖ 
> > ὃ / > / ~ / ~ 
παρ᾽ ἀνδράσιν ἰδιοξένοις τοῦ Φαυστύλου τραφῆναι 
γράμματα καὶ μουσικὴν καὶ χρῆσιν ὅπλων ᾿Βλληνι- 
~ 1 ᾽ ὃ ὃ / / “ > \ ὃ \ > , 
Kav! ἐκδιδασκομένους μέχρις ἥβης. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφί- 
KOVTO πρὸς τοὺς νομιζομένους γονεῖς συμβῆναι τὴν 
διαφορὰν αὐτοῖς πρὸς τοὺς Νεμέτορος βουκόλους 
περὶ τῶν συννόμων χωρίων. ἐκ δὲ τούτου πληγὰς 
A / 
αὐτοῖς δόντας ws αὐτοὺς ἀπελάσαι τὰς ἀγέλας, 
ποιῆσαι δὲ ταῦτα τῇ γνώμῃ τοῦ Νεμέτορος, ἵν᾽ 
ἀρχὴ γένοιτο ἐγκλημάτων καὶ ἅμα παρουσίας εἰς 
τὴν πόλιν τῷ νομευτικῷ πλήθει πρόφασις. ὡς δὲ 
“΄ > > / / \ 5 / a 
ταῦτ᾽ ἐγένετο Νεμέτορα μὲν Apodtov καταβοᾶν,. 
~ > / 
ὡς δεινὰ πάσχοι διαρπαζόμενος ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκείνου 
~ ? 
βουκόλων, καὶ ἀξιοῦν εἰ μηδενὸς αἴτιός 5 ἐστι παρα- 
~ \ \ 3 ε ~ \ \ Ssh 18 
δοῦναι τὸν βουφορβὸν 5 αὑτῷ καὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς ἐπὶ 
\ 
δίκῃ: “Auodvov δὲ ἀπολύσασθαι βουλόμενον τὴν 
Riis 7 » θέ \ \ ἄλλ Ὁ 
αἰτίαν τούς τε αἰτηθέντας καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἅπαντας, 
- - φ φιι ἢ σ 
ὅσοι παρεῖναι τοῖς γενομένοις εἶχον αἰτίαν, ἥκειν 
~ / \ 
κελεύειν δίκας ὑφέξοντας TH Νεμέτορι. πολλῶν δὲ 


1 ἑλληνικῶν B: ἑλληνικὴν R. 
. . "“ ΄“ > , 
2 αἴτιός Kiessling: αἴτιος ἐκείνου A, αἴτιος τῶν ἐκείνου Β. 


290 


BOOK 1. 84, 4-8 


to women who prostitute themselves for gain; but 
they are now called by a more respectable name, 
hetaerae or “companions.” But some who were 
ignorant of this invented the myth of the she-wolf, 
this animal being called in the Latin tongue lupa. 
The story continues that after the children were 
weaned they were sent by those who were rearing 
them to Gabii, a town not far from the Palatine 
hill, to be instructed in Greek learning ; and there 
they were brought up by some personal friends of 
Faustulus, being taught letters, music, and the 
use of Greek arms until they grew to manhood. 
After their return to their supposed parents the 
quarrel arose between them and Numitor’s herds- 
men concerning their common pastures ; thereupon 
they beat Numitor’s men so that these drove away 
their cattle, doing this by Numitor’s direction, to 
the intent that it might serve as a basis for his com- 
plaints and at the same time as an excuse for the 
crowd of herdsmen to come to town. When this had 
been brought about, Numitor raised a clamour 
against Amulius, declaring that he was treated 
outrageously, being plundered by the herdsmen of 
Amulius, and demanding that Amulius, if he was 
not responsible for any of this, should deliver up to 
him the herdsman and his sons for trial ; and Amulius, 
wishing to clear himself of the charge, ordered not 
only those who were complained of, but all the rest 
who were accused of having been present at the con- 
flict, to come and stand trial before Numitor. Then, 





® Kiessling: συοφορβὸν O. 
29] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ “ cal > / 2 τος ~ / ~ 
συνελθόντων ἅμα Tots ἐπαιτίοις ἐπὶ TH προφάσει τῆς 
οι. ~ , 
δίκης φράσαντα τοῖς νεανίσκοις τὸν μητροπάτορα 

~ ~ δ 
πᾶσαν τὴν καταλαβοῦσαν αὐτοὺς τύχην καὶ φήσαντα 
τιμωρίαν νῦν εἴ ποτε καιρὸν εἶναι λαβεῖν, αὐτίκα 

~ ~ DL FIA 
ποιήσασθαι σὺν τῷ νομευτικῷ πλήθει τὴν ἐπίθεσιν. 
> / ~ ~ » ~ 
περὶ μὲν οὖν γενέσεως καὶ τροφῆς τῶν οἰκιστῶν 
~ ε ~ 
τῆς “Ρώμης ταῦτα λέγεται. 
Ν \ 
LXXXV. Ta δὲ κατὰ τὴν κτίσιν αὐτὴν γενόμενα 
- ΝΜ \ / ~ a / 
(τοῦτο dvd ἔτι μοι TO μέρος τῆς γραφῆς λείπεται) 

- Μ / ? \ \ > / 

νῦν ἔρχομαι Sinynodpevos. ἐπειδὴ yap ᾿Αμολίου 
> \ / 
τελευτήσαντος ἀνενεώσατο τὴν ἀρχὴν ὃ Νεμέτωρ 
ἥδ᾽. > κ ΄’, 
ὀλίγον ἐπισχὼν χρόνον, ἐν ᾧ τὴν πόλιν ἐκ τῆς πρό- 
/ > / > A > 
τερον ἐπεχούσης ἀκοσμίας ' εἰς τὸν ἀρχαῖον ἐκόσμει 
A > \ 
τρόπον, εὐθὺς ἐπενόει τοῖς μειρακίοις ἰδίαν ἀρχὴν 
σ ~ 
κατασκευάσαι ἕτέραν πόλιν οἰκίσας. ἅμα δὲ Kal τοῦ 
~ 7 > / > ᾽ / > ’ 
πολιτικοῦ πλήθους ἐπίδοσιν εἰς εὐανδρίαν ἐσχηκότος 
~ ~ 4 "» " 
ἀπαναλῶσαί τι καλῶς ἔχειν ᾧετο, καὶ μάλιστα τὸ 

/ > ~ / ¢ A - = / 
διάφορον αὐτῷ ποτε γενόμενον, ws μὴ δι᾽ ὑποψίας 

»” A 
αὐτοὺς ἔχοι. κοινωσάμενος δὲ τοῖς μειρακίοις, 
> \ > / > / / ~ 4 A / \ 
ἐπειδὴ κἀκείνοις ἐδόκει, δίδωσιν αὐτοῖς χωρία μὲν 
e ” ” A Μ > / > A 
ὧν dp€ovaw, ἔνθα παῖδες ὄντες ἐτράφησαν, ἐκ δὲ 

~ ἢ ‘ yg ὃ 3. τὐλᾷ , 7 A / Δ 
τοῦ λεὼ τόν τε dt ὑποψίας αὐτῷ γενόμενον, ὃς 

~ ~ \ 
ἔμελλε νεωτερισμοῦ εἰσαῦθις ἄρχειν, καὶ εἴ τι 
- > - \ > 
ἑκούσιον ἀπαναστῆναι ἐβούλετο. ἦν δὲ ev τούτοις 
᾿] / 
πολὺ μὲν ὥσπερ εἰκὸς ev πόλει κινουμένῃ τὸ δη- 
μοτικὸν γένος, ἱκανὸν δὲ καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τοῦ κρατίστου 


292 


ἀκοσμίας B: ἀνομίας R. ὃ τὸν Kiessling: τὸ Ο. 


BOOK 1. 84, 8-85, 3 


when great numbers came to town together with the 
accused, ostensibly to attend the trial, the grand- 
father of the youths acquainted them with all the 
circumstances of their fortune, and telling them that 
now, if ever, was the time to avenge themselves, he 
straightway made his attack upon Amulius with the 
crowd of herdsmen. These, then, are the accounts 
that are given of the birth and rearing of the founders 
of Rome. 

LXXXYV. 11 am now going to relate the events 
that happened at the very time of its founding; for 
this partof my account still remains. When Numitor, 
upon the death of Amulius, had resumed his rule 
and had spent a little time in restoring the city from 
its late disorder to its former orderly state, he pre- 
sently thought of providing an independent rule 
for the youths by founding another city. At the 
same time, the inhabitants being much increased 
in number, he thought it good policy to get rid of 
some part of them, particularly of those who had 
once been his enemies, lest he might have cause 
to suspect any of his subjects. And having com- 
municated this plan to the youths and gained their 
approval, he gave them, as a district to rule, the 
region where they had been brought up in their 
infancy, and, for subjects, not only that part of the 
people which he suspected of a design to begin 
rebellion anew, but also any who were willing to 
migrate voluntarily. Among these, as is likely to 
happen when a city sends out a colony, there were 
great numbers of the common people, but there were 
also a sufficient number of the prominent men of 


1 For chaps. 85-88 cf. Livy i. 6, 3-7, 3. 
293 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


, ? \ ~ Aa \ Ε 7 \ 
γνώριμον, ex δὲ τοῦ Τρωικοῦ τὸ εὐγενέστατον δὴ 
2 - ΄ 
νομιζόμενον, ἐξ οὗ καὶ γενεαί τινες ἔτι περιῆσαν 
> ~ 
εἰς ἐμέ, πεντήκοντα μάλιστ᾽ οἶκοι. ἐχορηγεῖτο δὲ 
τοῖς νεανίσκοις καὶ χρήματα καὶ ὅπλα καὶ σῖτος καὶ 
ἀνδράποδα καὶ ὑποζύγια ἀχθοφόρα καὶ εἴ τι ἄλλο 
πόλεως ἦν κατασκευῇ πρόσφορον. ὡς δὲ ἀνέστησαν 
> ~ Μ « / ; \ \ / > ~ 
ἐκ τῆς “AdBas ot νεανίσκοι τὸν λεὼν μίξαντες αὐτῷ 
‘ ᾽ / Ὁ = > ~ ¥ \ \ \ 
τὸν αὐτόθεν, ὅσος ἦν ev τῷ ]Π]αλλαντίῳ καὶ περὶ τὴν 
Σατορνίαν ὑπολιπής, μερίζονται τὸ πλῆθος ἅπαν 
διχῆ. τοῦτο δὲ αὐτοῖς δόξαν παρέσχε φιλοτιμίας, 
σ ~ 5 / ~ \ > / « 7 A 
ἵνα θᾶττον ἀνύηται τῇ πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἁμίλλῃ τὰ 
ἔργα, αἴτιον δὲ τοῦ μεγίστου κακοῦ, στάσεως, 
ἐγένετο. οἵ τε γὰρ προσνεμηθέντες αὐτοῖς τὸν 
~ « 
ἑαυτῶν ἡγεμόνα ἑκάτεροι κυδαίνοντες ὡς ἐπιτήδειον 
ἁπάντων ἄρχειν ἐπῆρον, αὐτοί τε οὐκέτι μίαν γνώ- 
Μ»Μ 9 \ > \ A > ~ e 
μὴν ἔχοντες οὐδὲ ἀδελφὰ διανοεῖσθαι ἀξιοῦντες, ὡς 
αὐτὸς ἄρξων ἑκάτερος θατέρου, παρώσαντες τὸ 
~ > ~ 
ἴσον τοῦ πλείονος ὠρέγοντο. τέως μὲν οὖν ἀφανῆ 
~ > > 
τὰ πλεονεκτήματα αὐτῶν ἦν, ἔπειτα δὲ ἐξερράγη 
σὺν τοιᾷδε προφάσει. τὸ χωρίον ἔνθα ἔμελλον 
ς 4 ἢ \ p / > A x p ς ες »" 
ἱδρύσειν τὴν πόλιν οὐ τὸ αὐτὸ ἡρεῖτο ἑκάτερος. 
“Ῥωμύλου μὲν γὰρ ἦν γνώμη τὸ ]]αλλάντιον οἰκί- 
ζειν τῶν τε ἄλλων ἕνεκα καὶ τῆς τύχης τοῦ τόπου, 
ἢ τὸ σωθῆναί τε αὐτοῖς καὶ τραφῆναι παρέσχε" 
Ῥ / \ 3 / \ / ~ 3 » > / 
wpm δὲ ἐδόκει τὴν καλουμένην νῦν am ἐκείνου 
« 
Ῥ , , / ” δὲ \ / > a) 
ἐμορίαν οἰκίζειν. ἔστι δὲ TO χωρίον ἐπιτήδειον 


1 Schwartz: ἕκαστοι O, Jacoby. 





1This hill cannot be identified. The name was also 


294 


BOOK T. 85. 3-6 


the best class, and of the Trojan element all those 
who were esteemed the noblest in birth, some of 
whose posterity remained even to my day, consisting 
of about fifty families. The youths were supplied 
with money, arms and corn, with slaves and beasts 
of burden and everything else that was of use in the 
building of a city. After they had led their people 
out of Alba and intermingled with them the local 
population that still remained in Pallantium and 
Saturnia, they divided the whole multitude into two 
parts. This they did in the hope of arousing a spirit 
of emulation, so that through their rivalry with each 
other their tasks might be the sooner finished ; 
however, it produced the greatest of evils, discord. 
For each group, exalting its own leader, extolled 
him as the proper person to command them all ; 
and the youths themselves, being now no longer 
one in mind or feeling it necessary to entertain 
brotherly sentiments toward each other, since each 
2xpected to command the other, scorned equality and 
craved superiority. For some time their ambitions 
were concealed, but later they burst forth on the 
occasion which I shall now describe. They did 
not both favour the same site for the building of the 
city ; for Romulus proposed to settle the Palatine 
hill, among other reasons, because of the good fortune 
of the place where they had been preserved and 
brought up, whereas Remus favoured the place that 
is now named after him Remoria.t_ And indeed this 
place is very suitable for a city, being a hill not far 


given (according to Paulus in his epitome of Festus, 
p- 276) to a site on the summit of the Aventine where 
Remus was said to have taken the auspices (chap. 86). 


295 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ὑποδέξασθαι πόλιν λόφος οὐ πρόσω τοῦ Τεβέριος 
κείμενος, ἀπέχων τῆς Ῥώμης ἀμφὶ τοὺς τριάκοντα 
σταδίους. ἐκ δὲ τῆς φιλονεικίας ταύτης ἀκοινώνη- 
3 \ « - / ~ \ " \ 
τος εὐθὺς ὑπεδηλοῦτο φιλαρχία. τῷ yap εἴξαντι τὸ 
κρατῆσαν ἅπαντα ' ὁμοίως ἐπιθήσεσθαι ἔμελλεν. 
LXXXVI. Χρόνου δέ τινος ἐν τούτῳ διαγενομέ- 
νου, ἐπειδὴ οὐδὲν ἐμειοῦτο τῆς 5 στάσεως, δόξαν 
ἀμφοῖν τῷ μητροπάτορι ἐπιτρέψαι παρῆσαν εἰς τὴν 
» ε δὲ > ~ ~ ες Θ A 
ArBav. ὁ δὲ αὐτοῖς ταῦτα ὑποτίθεται: θεοὺς 
A 
ποιήσασθαι δικαστάς, ὁποτέρου χρὴ τὴν ἀποικίαν 
λέγεσθαι καὶ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν εἶναι. ταξάμενος δὲ 
> - ε / > / > ε ~ ,ὔ 
αὐτοῖς ἡμέραν ἐκέλευσεν ἐξ ἑωθινοῦ καθέζεσθαι 
\ > / > 2 ε / > ~ a 
χωρὶς ἀλλήλων, ἐν αἷς ἑκάτεροι ἀξιοῦσιν ἕδραις" 
- - «ε 
προθύσαντας δὲ τοῖς θεοῖς ἱερὰ τὰ νομιζόμενα 
> 
φυλάττειν οἰωνοὺς αἰσίους - ὁποτέρῳ δ᾽ av οἱ 
ὄρνιθες προτέρῳ κρείττους γένωνται, τοῦτον ἄρχειν 
΄ a > 
τῆς ἀποικίας. ἀπήεσαν ot νεανίσκοι ταῦτ᾽ ἐπαινέ- 
σαντες καὶ κατὰ τὰ συγκείμενα παρῆσαν ἐν τῇ 
/ ~ / ¢ / ao δὲ ῬΡ, 5A A 
Kupla Ths πράξεως ἡμέρᾳ. ἦν de Ῥωμύλῳ μὲν 
ε \ > / « ~ 
οἰωνιστήριον, ἔνθα ἠξίου τὴν ἀποικίαν ἱδρῦσαι, τὸ 
> ς \ > / / 
Παλλάντιον, ἙῬΡώμῳ δ᾽ ὁ προσεχὴς ἐκείνῳ λόφος 
- e c ~ 
Adevtivos καλούμενος, ws δέ τινες ἱστοροῦσιν ἡ 
« A , > ~ ~ > 9 / 
Pepopia: φυλακή τε ἀμφοῖν παρῆν οὐκ ἐπιτρέ- 
3 <A \ / λέ 4 « δὲ κ᾿ 
ψουσα 3 6 τι μὴ φανείη λέγειν. ὡς de Tas προση- 
, “ ” >\/ > A / c 
Kovoas ἕδρας ἔλαβον ὀλίγον ἐπισχὼν χρόνον ὁ 
« / ¢€ \ δῆ \ ~ \ \ iO 
Ῥωμύλος ὑπὸ σπουδῆς τε Kai τοῦ πρὸς τὸν ἀδελ- 
\ δ 5 ” δὲ \ ες θ 4 “ » A Π 
φὸν φθόνου" ἴσως δὲ καὶ ὁ θεὸς οὕτως ενῆγε, πρὶν 


1 ἅπαντα Kiessling, εἰς ἅπαντα Jacoby : εἰς πάντα Ο. 
Στῆς Ο: τὸ τῆς Hertlein, Jacoby. 


296 


BOOK I. 85, 6-86, 3 


from the Tiber and about thirty stades from Rome. 
From this rivalry their unsociable love of rule im- 
mediately began to disclose itself; for on the one 
who now yielded the victor would inevitably impose 
his will on all occasions alike. 

LXXXVI. Meanwhile, some time having elapsed 
and their discord in no degree abating, the two agreed 
to refer the matter to their grandfather and for that 
purpose went to Alba. He advised them to leave 
it to the decision of the gods which of them should 
give his name to the colony and be its leader. And 
having appointed for them a day, he ordered them 
to place themselves early in the morning at a dis- 
tance from one another, in such stations as each of 
them should think proper, and after first offering to 
the gods the customary sacrifices, to watch for aus- 
picious birds ; and he ordered that he to whom the 
more favourable birds first appeared should rule the 
colony. The youths, approving of this, went away 
and according to their agreement appeared on the 
day appointed for the test. Romulus chose for his 
station the Palatine hill, where he proposed settling 
the colony, and Remus the Aventine hill adjoining 
it, or, according to others, Remoria; and a guard 
attended them both, to prevent their reporting 
things otherwise than as they appeared. When they 
had taken their respective stations, Romulus, after 
a short pause, from eagerness and jealousy of his 
brother,—though possibly Heaven was thus directing 


3 οὐκ ἐπιτρέψουσα Kiessling: οὐκ ἔτι ἐπιτρέφουσα (ἐπιστρέ- 
φουσα B) O. 

4 Hertlein, Kayser: λέξειν O, Jacoby. 

δ ὡς δὲ καὶ ὁ φθόνος after φθόνου deleted by Reiske. 


297 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 
Ἅ 1 \ e - A θ / A , e \ 
ἢ} καὶ ὁτιοῦν σημεῖον θεάσασθαι πέμψας ws τὸν 
10 Ad \ > “λ σ΄ ἠξί ὃ \ / e / 
adeAdov ἀγγέλους ἥκειν ἠξίου διὰ ταχέων, Ws πρό- 
> \ > \ » / > - A ε / 
τερος ἰδὼν οἰωνοὺς αἰσίους. ἐν ᾧ δὲ ot πεμφθέντες 
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ δι᾽ αἰσχύνης ἔχοντες τὴν ἀπάτην οὐ 
σπουδῇ ἐχώρουν, τῷ “Ῥώμῳ γῦπες ἐπισημαίνουσιν 
ἕξ ἀπὸ τῶν δεξιῶν πετόμενοι. καὶ ὁ μὲν ἰδὼν 
> 
τοὺς ὄρνιθας περιχαρὴς ἐγένετο, μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ δὲ 
ot παρὰ τοῦ “Ῥωμύλου πεμφθέντες ἀναστήσαντες 
> \ ΝΜ SA A / > \ \ > ~ 
αὐτὸν ἄγουσιν ἐπὶ τὸ IlaAAdvrwv. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐν τῷ 
> ~ > / ” \ \ « / 4. Δ ~ 
αὐτῷ ἐγένοντο ἤρετο μὲν τὸν “Ῥωμύλον ὁ “Ῥῶμος 
οὕστινας οἰωνοὺς ἴδοι πρότερος, ὃ δὲ ἐν ἀπόρῳ 
γίνεται ὅ τι ἀποκρίναιτο. ἐν δὲ τούτῳ δώδεκα 
γῦπες αἴσιοι πετόμενοι ὥφθησαν, οὗς ἰδὼν θαρρεῖ 
τε καὶ τῷ “ῬΡώμῳ δείξας λέγει, “Τί γὰρ ἀξιοῖς τὰ 
~ / A 
πάλαι γενόμενα μαθεῖν ; τούσδε yap δή που τοὺς 
΄ - A 
οἰωνοὺς αὐτὸς Opds.” ὁ δὲ ἀγανακτεῖ τε καὶ δεινὰ 
- ~ ~ / 
ποιεῖται, ὡς διηρτημένος ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, τῆς τε ἀποικίας 
οὐ μεθήσεσθαι αὐτῷ φησιν. 
LXXXVII. Aviorata: δὴ ἐκ τούτου μείζων τῆς 
wv > ~ 
προτέρας ἔρις, ἑκατέρου τὸ πλέον ἔχειν ἀφανῶς 
͵ 2 A A 3 \ ~ 4 > ὃ \ > A ὃ 
διωκομένου,Σ τὸ δὲ 3 μὴ μεῖον ὁ ἀναφανδὸν ἀπὸ δι- 
~ / > / A 
καιώσεως τοιᾶσδε ἐπισυνάπτοντος. εἰρημένον yap 
εν ΄ ~ A Ὁ ἍἋ “4 
ἦν αὐτοῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ μητροπάτορος, ὅτῳ ἂν προτέρῳ 
3 / ~ Μ ~ 
κρείττους ὄρνιθες ἐπισημήνωσι, τοῦτον ἄρχειν τῆς 
5 / / \ > Θ ἄξω 3 ~ > θέ 
ἀποικίας * γένους δὲ ὀρνίθων ἑνὸς ἀμφοῖν ὀφθέν- 
aA ~ / > “-“ 
τος ὁ μὲν τῷ πρότερος, 6 δὲ τῷ πλείους ἰδεῖν 
174 added by Jacoby. j 
2 διωκομένου O: διοικουμένου Schmitz, δικαιουμένου Jacoby, 


διανοουμένου Hertlein. Madvig proposed τῷ πλέον ἔχειν ἀφανῶς 
διωκομένῳ τὸ μὴ μεῖον. . . ἐπισυνάπτοντος. 


298 


BOOK 1. 86, 3-87, 1 


him.,—even before he saw any omen at all, sent 
messengers to his brother desiring him to come 
immediately, as if he had been the first to see some 
auspicious birds. But while the persons he sent 
were proceeding with no great haste, feeling ashamed 
of the fraud, six vultures appeared to Remus, flying 
from the right; and he, seeing the birds, rejoiced 
greatly. And not long afterwards the men sent by 
Romulus took him thence and brought him to the 
Palatine hill. When they were together, Remus 
asked Romulus what birds he had been the first to 
see, and Romulus knew not what to answer. But 
thereupon twelve auspicious vultures were seen 
flying ; and upon seeing these he took courage, and 
pointing them out to Remus, said: “‘ Why do you 
demand to know what happened a long time ago ? 
For surely you see these birds yourself.” But 
Remus was indignant and complained bitterly 
because he had been deceived by him; and he re- 
fused to yield to him his right to the colony. 
LXXXVII. Thereupon greater strife arose between 
them than before, as each, while secretly striving 
for the advantage, was ostensibly willing to accept 
equality, for the following reason. Their grandfather, 
as I have stated, had ordered that he to whom the 
more favourable birds first appeared should rule the 
colony; but, as the same kind of birds had been 
seen by both, one had the advantage of seeing them 
first and the other that of seeing the greater number. 


3 δὲ D (according to Kiessling), Steph.: om. AB. 

ὁ μὴ μεῖον Steph., σημεῖον Schmitz, Sauppe: μνημεῖον A, 
μεῖζον B. 

5 Reiske: προτέρῳ O. 


299 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


3 - ~ 
ἐκρατύνετο. συνελάμβανε δὲ αὐτοῖς τῆς φιλονεικίας 
\ \ Μ ληθ a / rv / ὃ ,ὔ ~ 
καὶ τὸ ἄλλο πλῆθος ἦρξέ τε πολέμου δίχα τῶν 
ἡγεμόνων ὁπλισθέν, καὶ γίνεται μάχη καρτερὰ καὶ 
2 ᾽ > -~ / > / / ~ 
φόνος ἐξ ἀμφοῖν πολύς. ἐν ταύτῃ φασί τινες TH 
/ \ D 5A “ > θ / \ / 
μάχῃ τὸν Φαυστύλον, ds ἐξεθρέψατο τοὺς νεανίσκους, 
ὃ λῦ \ » ~ LO λ ~ λ / e > \ 
ιαλῦσαι τὴν ἔριν τῶν ἀδελφῶν βουλόμενον, ws οὐδὲν 
οἷός 7 ἦν ἀνύσαι, εἰς μέσους ὥσασθαι τοὺς μαχο- 
μένους ἄνοπλον θανάτου τοῦ ταχίστου τυχεῖν προ- 
θυμούμενον, ὅπερ ἐγένετο. τινὲς δὲ καὶ τὸν λέοντα 
~ > ~ ~ ~ 
τὸν λίθινον, ὃς ἔκειτο THs ἀγορᾶς τῆς τῶν Ρωμαίων 
9 ~ / / \ A 2 Λ + δὺν ~ 
ἐν τῷ κρατίστῳ χωρίῳ παρὰ Tots ἐμβόλοις, ἐπὶ TO 
4 ~ / ~ / v wv 
σώματι τοῦ Φαυστύλου τεθῆναί φασιν, ἔνθα ἔπεσεν 
ὑπὸ τῶν εὑρόντων ταφέντος. ἀποθανόντος δ᾽ ἐν τῇ 
7 ε / / > 4 ε Ῥ / > / 
μάχῃ ‘Popov νίκην οἰκτίστην ὁ “Ῥωμύλος ἀπό τε 
τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ καὶ πολιτικῆς ἀλληλοκτονίας ἀνελό- 
\ A “Ῥῷ > ~ Ῥ' / θ / > \ 
μενος Tov μὲν ‘Pdpov ἐν τῇ “Ρεμορίᾳ θάπτει, ἐπειδὴ 
καὶ ζῶν τοῦ χωρίου τῆς κτίσεως περιείχετο, αὐτὸς 
δὲ ὑπὸ λύπης τε καὶ μετανοίας τῶν πεπραγμένων 
παρεὶς ἑαυτὸν εἰς ἀπόγνωσιν τοῦ βίου τρέπεται. τῆς 
A 7 Δ \ μὴ 8 - > θ / 
δὲ Aavpertias, ἣ veoyvods παραλαβοῦσα ἐξεθρέψατο 
τ > 
Kal μητρὸς οὐχ ἧττον ἠσπάζετο, δεομένης καὶ παρη- 
γορούσης, ταύτῃ πειθόμενος ἀνίσταται - συναγαγὼν 
A \ / Ὁ \ \ \ / ᾽ὔ 
δὲ τοὺς Λατίνους, ὅσοι μὴ κατὰ τὴν μάχην διεφθά- 
ρησαν, ὀλίγῳ πλείους ὄντας τρισχιλίων ἐκ πάνυ 
πολλοῦ κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς γενομένου πλήθους, ὅτε τὴν 
ἀποικίαν ἔστελλε, πολίζει τὸ Παλλάντιον. 
> ~ a _¢ 
Ὃ μὲν οὖν πιθανώτατος τῶν λόγων περὶ τῆς Popov 
τελευτῆς οὗτος εἶναί μοι δοκεῖ. λεγέσθω δ᾽ ὅμως 


1 ὅπερ O: ὅπερ καὶ Cobet, Jacoby. 
300 


BOOK I. 87, 1-4 


The rest of the people also espoused their quarrel, and 
arming themselves without orders from their leaders, 
began war ; anda sharp battle ensued in which many 
were slain on both sides. In the course of this battle, 
as some say, Faustulus, who had brought up the 
youths, wishing to put an end to the strife of the 
brothers and being unable to do so, threw himself un- 
armed into the midst of the combatants, seeking the 
speediest death, which fell out accordingly. Some 
say also that the stone lion which stood in the princi- 
pal part of the Forum near the rostra was placed 
over the body of Faustulus, who was buried by those 
who found him in the place where he fell. Remus 
having been slain in this action, Romulus, who had 
gained a most melancholy victory through the death 
of his brother and the mutual slaughter of citizens, 
buried Remus at Remoria, since when alive he had 
clung to it as the site for the new city. As for him- 
self, in his grief and repentance for what had hap- 
pened, he became dejected and lost all desire for 
life. But when Laurentia, who had received the 
babes when newly born and brought them up and 
loved them no less than a mother, entreated and 
comforted him, he listened to her and rose up, and 
gathering together the Latins who had not been 
slain in the battle (they were now little more than 
three thousand out of a very great multitude at 
first, when he led out the colony), he built a city on 
the Palatine hill. 

The account I have given seems to me the most 
probable of the stories about the death of Remus. 


? Meineke: ἀπὸ O. ὃ Cobet: ἐφθάρησαν O. 
301 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


καὶ εἴ τις ἑτέρως ἔχων παραδέδοται... φασὶ δή 
τινες συγχωρήσαντ᾽ αὐτὸν τῷ “Ῥωμύλῳ τὴν ἡγε- 
μονίαν, ἀχθόμενον δὲ καὶ δι᾿ ὀργῆς ἔχοντα τὴν 
ἀπάτην, ἐπειδὴ κατεσκευάσθη τὸ τεῖχος φλαῦρον 
ἀποδεῖξαι τὸ ἔρυμα βουλόμενον, “᾿Αλλὰ τοῦτό y’,” 
εἰπεῖν, “od χαλεπῶς ἂν τις ὑμῖν ὑπερβαίη πολέμιος, 
ὥσπερ ἐγώ -᾿ καὶ αὐτίκα ὑπεραλέσθαι Κελέριον δέ 
τινα τῶν ἐπιβεβηκότων τοῦ τείχους, ὃς ἦν ἐπιστάτης 
τῶν ἔργων, “᾿Αλλὰ τοῦτόν γε τὸν πολέμιον οὐ 
χαλεπῶς av τις ἡμῶν ἀμύναιτο,᾽᾽ εἰπόντα, πλῆξαι τῷ 
σκαφείῳ κατὰ τῆς κεφαλῆς καὶ αὐτίκα ἀποκτεῖναι: 
τὸ μὲν δὴ τέλος τῆς στάσεως τῶν ἀδελφῶν τοιοῦτο 
λέγεται γενέσθαι. 

LXXXVIII. ᾿Επεὶ δὲ οὐδὲν ἔτι ἦν ἐμποδὼν τῷ 
κτίσματι προειπὼν ὁ “Ῥωμύλος ἡμέραν, 2 ἐν ἧ τοὺς 
θεοὺς ἀρεσάμενος ἔμελλε τὴν ἀρχὴν τῶν ἔργων 
ποιήσασθαι, παρασκευασάμενός τε ὅσα εἰς θυσίας 
καὶ ὑποδοχὰς τοῦ λεὼ χρησίμως ἕξειν ἔμελλεν, ὡς 
ἧκεν ὁ συγκείμενος χρόνος αὐτός τε προθύσας τοῖς 
θεοῖς καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους κελεύσας κατὰ δύναμιν τὸ 
αὐτὸ δρᾶν ὄρνιθας μὲν πρῶτον αἰσίους ὃ λαμβάνει" 
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο πυρκαϊὰς πρὸ τῶν σκηνῶν γενέσθαι 
κελεύσας ἐξάγει τὸν λεὼν τὰς φλόγας ὑπερθρώσκοντα 
τῆς ὁσιώσεως τῶν μιασμάτων ἕνεκα. ἐπεὶ δὲ πᾶν, 
ὅσον ἦν ἐκ λογισμοῦ θεοῖς φίλον, ᾧετο πεπρᾶχθαι, 
καλέσας ἅπαντας εἰς τὸν ἀποδειχθέντα τόπον περι- 
γράφει τετράγωνον σχῆμα τῷ λόφῳ, βοὸς ἄρρενος 

1 Kiessling: παραδίδοται O. 


2 ἡμέραν added by Reiske. 
8 αἰσίους Kiessling: ἀετοὺς Ow 


302 


BOOK I. 87, 4-88, 2 


However, if any has been handed down that differs 
from this, let that also be related. Some, indeed, 
say that Remus yielded the leadership to Romulus, 
though not without resentment and anger at the 
fraud, but that after the wall was built, wishing to 
demonstrate the weakness of the fortification, he 
cried, ** Well, as for this wall, one of your enemies 
could as easily cross it as I do,” and immediately 
leaped over it. Thereupon Celer, one of the men 
standing on the wall, who was overseer of the 
work, said, “ Well, as for this enemy, one of us 
could easily punish him,” and striking him on the 
head with a mattock, he killed him then and there. 
Such is said to have been the outcome of the quarrel 
between the brothers. 

LXXXVIII. When no obstacle now remained 
to the building of the city, Romulus appointed a 
day on which he planned to begin the work, after 
first propitiating the gods. And having prepared 
everything that would be required for the sacrifices 
and for the entertainment of the people, when the 
appointed time came, he himself first offered sacri- 
fice to the gods and ordered all the rest to do the 
same according to their abilities. He then in the 
first place took the omens, which were favourable. 
After that, having commanded fires to be lighted 
before the tents, he caused the people to come out 
and leap over the flames in order to expiate their 
guilt. When he thought everything had been done 
which he conceived to be acceptable to the gods, he 
called all the people to the appointed place and de- 
scribed a quadrangular figure about the hill, tracing 
with a plough drawn by a bull and a cow yoked 


303 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


- ᾽ , ε » ae. ¢ / » 
ἅμα θηλείᾳ ζευχθέντος ὑπ᾽ ἄροτρον ἑλκύσας αὔλακα 
~ \ / ε / \ A >? 
διηνεκῆ τὴν μέλλουσαν ὑποδέξεσθαι τὸ τεῖχος - ἐξ 
οὗ “Ρωμαίοις τὸ ἔθος τοῦτο τῆς περιαρόσεως τῶν 
χωρίων ἐν οἰκισμοῖς πόλεων παραμένει. ἐργασά- 
μενος δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τῶν βοῶν ἑκατέρους ἱερεύσας 
ἄλλων τε πολλῶν θυμάτων καταρξάμενος ἐφίστησι 
τοῖς ἔργοις τὸν λεών. ταύτην ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ τὴν 
ε / «ς / e / 6 ~ » “ σ΄ 
ἡμέραν “Ῥωμαίων ἡ πόλις ἑορτῶν οὐδεμιᾶς ἥττονα 
/ > “ ” »” ~ \1 

τιθεμένη Kal? ἕκαστον ἔτος ἄγει, καλοῦσι δὲ 
ΤῚ ‘ir 2 θ / δ᾽ > b] ~ \ ~ 

αρίλια.3 θύουσι ἐν αὐτῇ περὶ γονῆς τετρα- 

¢ ~ / 
πόδων οἱ γεωργοὶ καὶ νομεῖς θυσίαν χαριστήριον 
ἔαρος ἀρχομένου. πότερον δὲ παλαίτερον ἔτι τὴν 
¢ / ΄ > > / 8 / 3 > ὃ 
ἡμέραν ταύτην ev εὐπαθείαις διάγοντες 3 ἐπιτηδειο- 
τάτην οἰκισμῷ πόλεως ἐνόμισαν, ἢ τοῦ κτίσματος 
ἄρξασαν ἱερὰν ἐποιήσαντο καὶ θεοὺς ἐν αὐτῇ τοὺς 
΄ f / » ~ ᾽ » 

ποιμέσι φίλους γεραίρειν ᾧοντο δεῖν, οὐκ ἔχω βε- 
βαίως εἰπεῖν. 

LXXXIX. “A μὲν οὖν ἐμοὶ δύναμις ἐγένετο σὺν 
πολλῇ φροντίδι ἀνευρεῖν Ελλήνων τε καὶ Ρωμαίων 

\ 3 ΄ \ ¢ \ ~ ~ «ς , 
συχνὰς ἀναλεξαμένῳ γραφὰς ὑπὲρ τοῦ τῶν Ῥωμαίων 
γένους, τοιάδ᾽ ἐστίν. ὥστε θαρρῶν ἤδη τις ἀπο- 
φαινέσθω, πολλὰ χαίρειν φράσας τοῖς βαρβάρων καὶ 
δραπετῶν καὶ ἀνεστίων ἀνθρώπων καταφυγὴν τὴν 
“Ρώμην ποιοῦσιν, ᾿ Ελλάδα πόλιν αὐτήν, ἀποδεικνύ- 
1 καλοῦσι δὲ ΒΡ, κάλους ABa; καλοῦσα Steph. 


*Sylburg: παρεντάλια O. 
8 διάγοντες added by Sintenis. 


304 


BOOK T. 88, 2-89, 1 


together a continuous furrow designed to receive 
the foundation of the wall; and from that time this 
custom has continued among the Romans of plough- 
ing a furrow round the site where they plan to build 
a city. After he had done this and sacrificed the 
bull and the cow and also performed the initial rites 
over many other victims, he set the people to work. 
This day the Romans celebrate every year even 
down to my time as one of their greatest festivals and 
eall it the Parilia.! On this day, which comes in the 
beginning of spring, the husbandmen and herdsmen 
offer up a sacrifice of thanksgiving for the increase 
of their cattle. But whether they had celebrated 
this day in even earlier times as a day of rejoicing 
and for that reason looked upon it as the most suitable 
for the founding of the city, or whether, because 
it marked the beginning of the building of the city, 
they consecrated it and thought they should honour 
on it the gods who are propitious to shepherds, 
I cannot say for certain. 

LXXXIX. Such, then, are the facts concerning 
the origin of the Romans which I have been able to 
discover after reading very diligently many works 
written by both Greek and Roman authors. Hence, 
from now on let the reader forever renounce the views 
of those who make Rome a retreat of barbarians, 
fugitives and vagabonds, and let him confidently 
affirm it to be a Greek city,—which will be easy when 

1 The Parilia, or more properly Palilia, was an ancient 
festival celebrated by the shepherds and herdsmen on the 
21st of April in honour of the divinity Pales. See the de- 
tailed description of its observance in Ovid, Fasti iv. 721 ff., 
with Sir James Frazer’s note on that passage (vol. iil. pp. 
336-42; condensed in his L.C.L. edition, pp. 411-13). 

905 
VOL. I. : ὦ 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ 1 / / \ θ 
μενος μὲν κοινοτάτην τε πόλεων καὶ φιλανθρωπο- 
/ > θ ͵ ὃ \ 2 Ὁ A \ ~ "A / 
τάτην, ἐνθυμούμενος δὲ " ὅτι τὸ μὲν τῶν 4 βοριγίνων 
φῦλον Οἰνωτρικὸν ἦν, τοῦτο δὲ ᾿Αρκαδικόν - μεμνη- 
μένος δὲ τῶν συνοικησάντων αὐτοῖς ΠΠ]ελασγῶν, οἵ 
Θετταλίαν καταλιπόντες ᾿Αργεῖοι τὸ γένος ὄντες εἰς 
᾿Ιταλίαν ἀφίκοντο: Εὐάνδρου τε αὖ καὶ ᾿Αρκάδων 
ἀφίξεως, ot περὶ τὸ Παλλάντιον ᾧκησαν, ᾿Αβοριγίνων 

- ΝΜ \ 

αὐτοῖς παρασχόντων TO ywpiov: ἔτι δὲ Πελοπον- 
νησίων τῶν σὺν ᾿Ηρακλεῖ παραγενομένων, ot 
κατῴκησαν ἐπὶ τοῦ Σατορνίου: τελευταῖον δὲ τῶν 
ἀπαναστάντων ἐκ τῆς Τρωάδος καὶ συγκερασθέντων 
τοῖς προτέροις. τούτων γὰρ ἂν οὐδὲν εὕροι τῶν 
5 ~ Μ > / + « 4 ε 
ἐθνῶν οὔτε ἀρχαιότερον οὔτε ᾿ λληνικώτερον. αἱ 

\ ~ / > / >, a ε / A 
δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων ἐπιμιξίαι, δι᾽ ἃς ἡ πόλις πολλὰ 
τῶν ἀρχαίων ἐπιτηδευμάτων ἀπέμαθε, σὺν χρόνῳ 
ἐγένοντο. καὶ θαῦμα μὲν τοῦτο πολλοῖς ἂν εἶναι 
δόξειε τὰ εἰκότα λογισαμένοις, πῶς οὐχ ἅπασα 
> / > / « / A 
ἐξεβαρβαρώθη Οπικούς τε ὑποδεξαμένη καὶ Μαρ- 
σοὺς καὶ Σαυνίτας καὶ Τυρρηνοὺς καὶ Βρεττίους 
᾿Ομβρικῶν τε καὶ Λιγύων καὶ ᾿Ιβήρων καὶ Κελτῶν 

\ / Μ \ - > / »Μ 

συχνὰς μυριάδας ἄλλα τε πρὸς τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἔθνη, 

\ \ > >] ~ > / \ B+ 5D ¢ / > / 
τὰ μὲν ἐξ αὐτῆς ᾿Ιταλίας, τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ ἑτέρων ἀφιγμένα 
τόπων, μυρία ὅσα οὔτε ὁμόγλωττα οὔτε ὁμοδί- 
αιτα, ὧν 3 καὶ βίους σύγκλυδας ἀναταραχθέντας ἐκ 
τοσαύτης διαφωνίας πολλὰ τοῦ παλαιοῦ κόσμου 
τῆς πόλεως νεοχμῶσαι εἰκὸς ἦν: ἐπεὶ ἄλλοι γε 
συχνοὶ ἐν βαρβάροις οἰκοῦντες ὀλίγου χρόνου 

1 μὲν added by Reiske. 2 δὲ added by Reiske. 


8 After ὧν the MSS. have οὔτε φωνὰς οὔτε δίαιταν, deleted 
by Ritschl. 


306 


BOOK I. 89, 1-4 


he shows that it is at once the most hospitable and 
friendly of all cities, and when he bears in mind that 
the Aborigines were Oenotrians, and these in turn 
Arcadians, and remembers those who joined with 
them in their settlement, the Pelasgians who were 
Argives by descent and came into Italy from Thes- 
saly; and recalls, moreover, the arrival of Evander 
and of the Arcadians, who settled round the 
Palatine hill, after the Aborigines had granted the 
place to them; and also the Peloponnesians, who, 
coming along with Hercules, settled upon the Satur- 
nian hill; and, last of all, those who left the Troad 
and were intermixed with the earlier settlers. For 
one will find no nation that is more ancient or 
more Greek than these. But the admixtures of the 
barbarians with the Romans, by which the city 
forgot many of its ancient institutions, happened 
at a later time. And it may well seem a cause of 
wonder to many who reflect on the natural course 
of events that Rome did not become entirely 
barbarized after receiving the Opicans, the Marsians, 
the Samnites, the Tyrrhenians, the Bruttians and 
many thousands of Umbrians, Ligurians, Iberians 
and Gauls, besides innumerable other nations, 
some of whom came from Italy itself and some 
from other regions and differed from one another 
both in their language and habits; for their very 
ways of life, diverse as they were and thrown into 
turmoil by such dissonance, might have been ex- 
pected to cause many innovations in the ancient 
order of the city. For many others by living among 
barbarians have in a short time forgotten all their 


307 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


διελθόντος ἅπαν τὸ ᾿λληνικὸν ἀπέμαθον, ὡς μήτε 
A 
φωνὴν ᾿Ελλάδα φθέγγεσθαι μήτε ἐπιτηδεύμασιν 
᾿Ελλήνων * χρῆσθαι, μήτε θεοὺς τοὺς αὐτοὺς νομέ- 
ζειν, μήτε νόμους τοὺς ἐπιεικεῖς, ᾧ μάλιστα διαλ- 
λάσσει φύσις ᾿Ελλὰς βαρβάρου, μήτε τῶν ἄλλων 
λ / δ᾽ «ς ~ 2 > ~ ὃ \ \ A / 

συμβολαίων μηδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν." ἀποχρῶσι de τὸν λόγον 
τόνδε3 ᾿Αχαιῶν οἱ περὶ τὸν Πόντον φκημένοι τεκμη- 

~ >HX ~ 4 \ > ~ “EX / / 
ριῶσαι, etou* μὲν ἐκ τοῦ ηνικωτάτου γενό- 
μενοι, βαρβάρων δὲ συμπάντων νῦν ὃ ὄντες ὃ ἀγριώ- 
τατοι. 

ΧΟ. Ρωμαῖοι δὲ φωνὴν μὲν οὔτ᾽ ἄκρως βάρβαρον 

” > 3 / ¢ / / \ / 
οὔτ᾽ ἀπηρτισμένως ᾿Ελλάδα φθέγγονται, μικτὴν δέ 

> > A Φ > ε / > , ~ 

τινα ἐξ ἀμφοῖν, ἧς ἐστιν ἡ πλείων AlodXis, τοῦτο 
μόνον ἀπολαύσαντες ἐκ τῶν πολλῶν ἐπιμιξιῶν, τὸ 

\ ~ ~ θ / > 0 ~ A ὃ \ » ¢ / 
μὴ πᾶσι τοῖς φθόγγοις ὀρθοεπεῖν, τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ὁπόσα 

/ ὝἝ, ~ vA > >] \ 8 € 3 o ͵ὔ 
γένους ᾿ Ἑλληνικοῦ μηνύματ᾽ ἐστὶν ὃ ὡς οὐχ ἕτεροί 
τινες τῶν ἀποικησάντων διασώζοντες, οὐ νῦν πρῶτον 
> / \ / ~ ς / \ "s \ 
ἀρξἕάμενοι πρὸς φιλίαν ζῆν, ἡνίκα τὴν τύχην πολλὴν 
καὶ ἀγαθὴν ῥέουσαν διδάσκαλον ἔχουσι τῶν καλῶν 

1 ἑλλήνων B: ἑλλήνων ἔτι R. 

frmens Steph. 2: ὅτι εἰσὶν O. 

3 ὡς ἀληθῆ εἶναι after τόνδε deleted by Cobet. 

4. Kiessling: ἠλείων Bb, Jacoby, ἥλων Ba (Kiessling 
reports ἠλοῖ for B), ὅλων A; φύλων Sintenis, πάλαι Urlichs. 

5 pov Ο: τῶν νῦν Meutzner, Jacoby. 

6 Sylburg: ὄντων O. 


7 Reiske: ἄκραν O. 
8 μηνύματ᾽ ἐστὶν Jacoby: μήνυμά ἐστιν A, ἐστὶν μήνυμα Ba. 





1 These Asiatic Achaeans were a barbarian people of the 
Caucasus, whose name was made to coincide with that of 
the Greek Achaeans; hence the belief arose that they were 


308 


BOOK 1. 89, 4-90, 1 


Greek heritage, so that they neither speak the Greek 
language nor observe the customs of the Greeks nor 
acknowledge the same gods nor have the same equi- 
table laws (by which most of all the spirit of the 
Greeks differs from that of the barbarians) nor agree 
with them in anything else whatever that relates 
to the ordinary intercourse of life. Those Achaeans 
who are settled near the Euxine sea are a sufficient 
proof of my contention; for, though originally Eleans, 
of a nation the most Greek of any, they are now the 
most savage of all barbarians.! 

XC. The language spoken by the Romans is 
neither utterly barbarous nor absolutely Greek, but 
a mixture, as it were, of both, the greater part of 
which is Aeolic?; and the only disadvantage they 
have experienced from their intermingling with 
these various nations is that they do not pronounce 
all their sounds properly. But all other indications 
of a Greek origin they preserve beyond any other 
colonists. For it is not merely recently, since they 
have enjoyed the full tide of good fortune to instruct 
them in the amenities of life, that they have begun 
to live humanely; nor is it merely since they first 


an offshoot of the latter. Strabo connected them either 
with the Boeotian Orchomenus (ix. 2, 42) or with Phthiotis 
(xi. 2, 12); other writers do not go into the same detail. 
The name “ Eleans’’ in the text must be regarded as very 
uncertain ; see the critical note. 

2 Dionysius is probably thinking particularly of the 
letter digamma (cf. p. 65, n. 1) which Quintilian (i. 4, 8; 
i. 7, 26) calls the Aeolic letter, and the preservation in 
Aeolic, as well as Doric, of the original d, as in φάμα (Lat. 
fama), μάτηρ (mater), as contrasted with the Ionic φήμη, μήτηρ. 
Quintilian, too, regards the Aeolic dialect as being closest 
to Latin (i. 6, 31). 

309 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δ᾽ > > - ~ 3 / ~ 4 A 
οὐδ᾽ ad’ οὗ πρῶτον ὠρέχθησαν τῆς διαποντίου τὴν 
K ὃ ,ὔ \ M ὃ / Ξ > \ aA / 
αρχηδονίων καὶ ακεδόνων ἀρχὴν καταλύσαντες, 
> > > A - / ’ ’ σ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ παντὸς οὗ συνῳκίσθησαν χρόνου βίον “EA- 
ληνα ζῶντες καὶ οὐδὲν ἐκπρεπέστερον ἐπιτηδεύοντες 
\ ~ 7 ~ 
πρὸς ἀρετὴν νῦν ἢ πρότερον. μυρία δ᾽ εἰς τοῦτο 
λέγειν ἔχων καὶ πολλοῖς τεκμηρίοις χρῆσθαι δυνά- 
μενος ἀνδρῶν τε μαρτυρίας φέρειν οὐκ ἀξίων 
ἀπιστεῖσθαι, πάντα ἀναβάλλομαι ταῦτα εἰς τὸν 
περὶ τῆς πολιτείας αὐτῶν συγγραφησόμενον λόγον. 
\ \ Pah \ tea / / \ > 
νυνὶ δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἑξῆς διήγησιν τρέψομαι τὴν ava- 
~ ~ / 
κεφαλαίωσιν τῶν ἐν ταύτῃ δεδηλωμένων τῇ βίβλῳ 
΄- > / ~ / > / 
τῆς ἐχομένης γραφῆς ποιησάμενος ἀρχήν. 


310 


BOOK I. 90, 1-2 


aimed at the conquest of countries lying beyond 
the sea, after overthrowing the Carthaginian and 
Macedonian empires, but rather from the time 
when they first joined in founding the city, that 
they have lived like Greeks; and they do not 
attempt anything more illustrious in the pursuit 
of virtue now than formerly. I have innumerable 
things to say upon this subject and can adduce many 
arguments and present the testimony of credible 
authors; but I reserve all this for the account I 
propose to write of their government.! I shall now 
resume the thread of my narrative, after prefacing 
to the following Book a recapitulation of what is 
contained in this. 


1See especially vii. 70 ff., where Dionysius reminds the 
reader of the promise made here. As contrasted with 
Book I, which deals with the origin of the Romans. all 
the rest of the work could be thought of as an account of 
their government. 


311 


AIONYZI1OY 
AAIKAPNASEQS 
POMAIKH: APXAIOAOTIAS 


ROTCS ALT TEP oS 


Ἢ Ρωμαίων πόλις ἵδρυται μὲν ἐν τοῖς ἑσπερίοις 
μέρεσι τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας περὶ ποταμὸν Τέβεριν, ὃς κατὰ 
μέσην μάλιστα τὴν ἀκτὴν ἐκδίδωσιν, ἀπέχουσα τῆς 
Τυρρηνικῆς θαλάττης ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι σταδίους. οἱ 
δὲ κατασχόντες αὐτὴν πρῶτοι τῶν μνημονευομένων 
βάρβαροί τινες ἦσαν αὐτόχθονες Σικελοὶ λεγόμενοι 
πολλὰ καὶ ἄλλα τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας χωρία κατασχόντες, ὧν 
οὐκ ὀλίγα διέμεινεν. οὐδ᾽ ἀφανῆ μνημεῖα. μέχρι τῶν 
καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς χρόνων, ἐν οἷς καὶ τόπων τινῶν ὀνόματα 
Σικελικὰ λεγόμενα, μηνύοντα τὴν πάλαι ποτὲ αὐτῶν 
ἐνοίκησιν. τούτους ἐκβαλόντες ᾿Αβοριγῖνες αὐτοὶ 
κατέσχον τὸν τόπον Οἰνώτρων ὄντες ἀπόγονοι τῶν 
κατοικούντων τὴν ἀπὸ Τάραντος ἄχρι []οσειδωνίας 
παράλιον. ἱερά τις αὕτη νεότης καθοσιωθεῖσα θεοῖς 

\ ‘ > / / « \ ~ / > 
κατὰ TOV ἐπιχώριον νόμον ὑπὸ τῶν πατέρων ἀπο- 
σταλῆναι λέγεται χώραν οἰκήσουσα τὴν ὑπὸ τοῦ 
δαιμονίου σφίσι δοθησομένην. τὸ δὲ τῶν Οἰνώτρων 
γένος ᾿ἀρκαδικὸν ἦν ἐκ τῆς τότε μὲν καλουμένης 


912 


THE ROMAN ANTIQUITIES 
OF 
DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


BOOK II 


The city of Rome is situated in the western part 
of Italy near the river Tiber, which empties into 
the Tyrrhenian sea about midway along the coast ; 
from the sea the city is distant one hundred and 
twenty stades. Its first known occupants were 
certain barbarians, natives of the country, called 
Sicels, who also occupied many other parts of Italy 
and of whom not a few distinct memorials are left 
even to our times; among other things there are 
even some names of places said to be Sicel names, 
which show that this people formerly dwelt in the 
land. They were driven out by the Aborigines, 
who occupied the place in their turn; these were 
descendants of the Oenotrians who inhabited the 
seacoast from Tarentum to Posidonia. They were 
a band of holy youths consecrated to the gods 
according to their local custom and sent out by 
their parents, it is said, to inhabit the country which 
Heaven should give them. The Oenotrians were an 
Arcadian tribe who had of their own accord left 


313 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Λυκαονίας, viv δὲ Ἀρκαδίας, ἑκουσίως ἐξελθὸν 
ἐπὶ γῆς κτῆσιν ἀμείνονος ἡγουμένου τῆς ἀποικίας 
Οἰνώτρου τοῦ Λυκάονος, ἐφ᾽ οὗ τὴν ἐπίκλησιν τὸ 
ἔθνος ἔλαβεν. ᾿Αβοριγίνων δὲ κατεχόντων τὰ χωρία 
πρῶτοι μὲν αὐτοῖς γίνονται σύνοικοι [Π]ελασγοὶ 
πλάνητες ἐκ τῆς τότε μὲν καλουμένης Aipovias, 
νῦν δὲ Θετταλίας, ἐν ἧ χρόνον τινὰ ᾧκησαν: μετὰ 
δὲ τοὺς Πελασγοὺς ᾿Αρκάδες ἐκ Παλλαντίου πόλεως 
ἐξελθόντες Εὔανδρον ἡγεμόνα ποιησάμενοι τῆς 
ἀποικίας ᾿ρμοῦ καὶ νύμφης Θέμιδος υἱόν, ot πρὸς 
evi τῶν ἑπτὰ λόφων πολίζονται ὃς ἐν μέσῳ μάλιστα 
κεῖται τῆς “Ῥώμης, []]αλλάντιον ὀνομάσαντες τὸ 
χωρίον ἐπὶ τῆς ἐν ᾿Αρκαδίᾳ πατρίδος. χρόνοις δ᾽ 
οὐ πολλοῖς ὕστερον ᾿Ηρακλέους καταχθέντος εἰς 
᾿Ιταλίαν, ὅτε τὴν στρατιὰν ἐξ ᾿Ερυθείας οἴκαδε 
ἀπήγαγε, μοῖρά τις ὑπολειφθεῖσα τῆς σὺν αὐτῷ 
δυνάμεως ᾿Ελληνικὴ πλησίον ἱδρύεται τοῦ 11|αλ- 
λαντίου, πρὸς ἑτέρῳ τῶν ἐμπεπολισμένων τῇ πόλει 
λόφων, ὃς τότε μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων Σατόρνιος 
ἐλέγετο, νῦν δὲ Καπιτωλῖνος ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων - ᾽Επειοὶ 
οἱ πλείους τούτων 5 ἦσαν ἐκ πόλεως "Ηλιδος ἐξανα- 
στάντες διαπεπορθημένης αὐτοῖς τῆς πατρίδος ὑφ᾽ 
“Ηρακλέους. 

Il. Γενεᾷ δ᾽ ἑκκαιδεκάτῃ μετὰ τὸν Τρωικὸν 
πόλεμον ᾿Αλβανοὶ συνοικίζουσιν ἄμφω τὰ χωρία 
ταῦτα τείχει περιλαβόντες καὶ Tadpw. τέως δὲ ἦν 
αὔλια βουφορβίων τε καὶ ποιμνίων ὃ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
καταγωγαὶ βοτήρων ἄφθονον ἀναδιδούσης πόαν τῆς 


1 πόλει B: ῥώμῃ R. 
314 


BOOK II. 1, 2-2, 1 


the country then called Lycaonia and now Areadia, 
in search of a better land, under the leadership of 
Oenotrus, the son of Lycaon, from whom the nation 
received its name. While the Aborigines occupied 
this region the first who joined with them in their 
settlement were the Pelasgians, a wandering people 
who came from the country then called Haemonia 
and now Thessaly, where they had lived for some 
time. After the Pelasgians came the Arcadians 
from the city of Pallantium, who had chosen as 
leader of their colony Evander, the son of Hermes 
and the nymph Themis. These built a town beside 
one of the seven hills that stands near the middle 
of Rome, calling the place Pallantium, from their 
mother-city in Arcadia. Not long afterwards, 
when Hercules came into Italy on his return home 
with his army from Erytheia, a certain part of his 
force, consisting of Greeks, remained behind and 
settled near Pallantium, beside another of the hills 
that are now inclosed within the city. This was 
then called by the inhabitants the Saturnian hill, 
but is now called the Capitoline hill by the Romans. 
The greater part of these men were Epeans who had 
abandoned their city in Elis after their country had 
been laid waste by Hercules. 

II. In the sixteenth generation after the Trojan 
war the Albans united both these places into one 
settlement, surrounding them with a wall and a 
ditch. For until then there were only folds for 
cattle and sheep and quarters of the other herdsmen, 


2 οἱ πλείους τούτων Kiessling, τούτων οἱ πλείους Reiske: 
πλείους τούτων B, τούτων πλείους R. 
3 ποιμνίων B: ποιμένων A. 


315 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> / - > / \ / > \ ‘ \ 
αὐτόθι γῆς οὐ μόνον τὴν χειμερινήν ἀλλὰ Kal τὴν 
θερεινόμον διὰ τοὺς ἀναψύχοντάς τε καὶ κατάρδον- 
Ε] \ / / δὲ \ ~ 1 "A ~ 2 
τας αὐτὴν ποταμούς. γένος δὲ τὸ τῶν Ἀλβανῶν 
A Ss ” ~ \ 3 / ‘ 
μικτὸν ἦν ἔκ te []ελασγῶν καὶ ᾿Αρκάδων Kat 
᾿Επειῶν τῶν ἐξ "Ηλιδος ἐλθόντων," τελευταίων δὲ 
τῶν pet ᾿ΪΙλίου ἅλωσιν ἀφικομένων εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν 
Τρώων, οὗς ἦγεν" Αἰνείας ὁ Ayxicov καὶ t Ἀφροδίτης. 
εἰκὸς δέ τι καὶ βαρβαρικὸν ἐκ τῶν προσοίκων ἢ 
παλαιῶν οἰκητόρων ὑπολιπὲς τῷ ᾿Ελληνικῷ συγ- 
καταμιγῆναι.5 ὄνομα δὲ κοινὸν οἱ σύμπαντες οὗτοι 
Λατῖνοι ἐκλήθησαν ἐπ᾽ ἀνδρὸς δυναστεύσαντος τῶν 
τόπων Aativov τὰς κατ᾽ ἔθνος ὀνομασίας ἀφαι- 
ρεθέντες. ἐτειχίσθη μὲν οὖν ἡ πόλις ὑπὸ τούτων 
τῶν ἐθνῶν ἐνιαυτῷ δευτέρῳ καὶ τριακοστῷ ὅ καὶ 
~ > i / 4 1A >? \ ~ ¢ 5 / 
τετρακοσιοστῷ μετ᾽ ᾽Ιλίου" ἅλωσιν ἐπὶ τῆς ἑβδόμης 
> / ς \ > / \ > / > \ 
ὀλυμπιάδος. οἱ δὲ ἀγαγόντες τὴν ἀποικίαν ἀδελφοὶ 
δίδυμοι τοῦ βασιλείου γένους ἦσαν - “Ῥωμύλος αὐτῶν 
ὄνομα θατέρῳ, τῷ δ᾽ ἑτέρῳ “Ῥῶμος τὰ μητρόθεν 
\ > > > , \ / \ \ 
μὲν am Αἰνείου te καὶ Aapdavidar, πατρὸς δὲ 
> / \ > cf, > a > [χ 4 
ἀκρίβειαν μὲν οὐ ῥάδιον εἰπεῖν ἐξ ὅτου φύντες, 
/ > ἢ, ¢ / a Cu A / 
πεπίστευνται δὲ ὑπὸ Ρωμαίων Ἄρεος υἱοὶ γενέσθαι. 
οὐ μέντοι διέμεινάν γε ἀμφότεροι τῆς ἀποικίας 
~ ~ Ψ 
ἡγεμόνες ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀρχῆς στασιάσαντες ἀλλ᾽ ὁ 
\ ᾽ ~ Ῥ 5A > Xr ͵ θ ‘ 
περιλειφθεὶς αὐτῶν “Ῥωμύλος ἀπολομένου θατέρου 


1 τῶν added by Grasberger. 
5 " ἀλβανῶν Be ἀλβανὸν R. 

ὅ ἔκ τε [Πελασγῶν καὶ ᾿Αρκάδων καὶ ᾿Επειῶν τῶν ἐξ Ἤλιδος 
ἐλθόντων Ambrosch: ἔκ τε ἀρκαδίων . . . ἐλθόντων καὶ πελασγῶν 
B, ἔκ τε ἀρκάδων καὶ πελασγῶν καὶ τῶν ἐξ ἤλιδος ἐλθόντων 
ἐπειῶν R. 

4 μετὰ ἰλίου O: μετὰ τὴν ᾿Ιλίου Jacoby. 


316 


BOOK II. 2. 1-4 


as the land round about yielded plenty of grass, not 
only for winter but also for summer pasture, by reason 
of the rivers that refresh and water it. The Albans 
were a mixed nation composed of Pelasgians, of 
Arecadians, of the Epeans who came from Elis, and, 
last of all, of the Trojans who came into Italy with 
Aeneas, the son of Anchises and Aphrodité, after the 
taking of Troy. It is probable that a barbarian 
element also from among the neighbouring peoples 
or a remnant of the ancient inhabitants of the place 
was mixed with the Greek. But all these people, 
having lost their tribal designations, came to be 
called by one common name, Latins, after Latinus, 
who had been king of this country. The walled 
city, then, was built by these tribes in the four 
hundred and thirty-second year after the taking of 
Troy, and in the seventh Olympiad.! The leaders 
of the colony were twin brothers of the royal family, 
Romulus being the name of one and Remus of the 
other. On the mother’s side they were descended 
from Aeneas and were Dardanidae; it is hard 
to say with certainty who their father was, but the 
Romans believe them to have been the sons of 
Mars. However, they did not both continue to be 
leaders of the colony, since they quarrelled over the 
command; but after one of them had been slain 
in the battle that ensued, Romulus, who survived, 


1751 B.c. 


5 ots ἦγεν Reiske: ὃς ἦν O. 

6 Biicheler: συγκαταλεγῆναι O. 

? κατὰ ἔθνος O: κατὰ τὸ ἔθνος Jacoby, κατὰ ἔθνη Reiske. 
8 καὶ τριακοστῷ added by Gelenius. 


317 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ ~ 
κατὰ τὴν μάχην οἰκιστὴς γίνεται τῆς πόλεως Kal 
τοὔνομα αὐτῇ τῆς ἰδίας κλήσεως ἐπώνυμον τίθεται. 
5 ~ ~ -" 
ἀριθμὸς δὲ τῶν μετασχόντων αὐτῷ ' τῆς ἀποικίας 
5 \ ~ ~ » 5 A » 7 > , 
ἀπὸ πολλοῦ τοῦ κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς ἐξαποσταλέντος ὀλίγος 
mui fe , \ ἘΠ τὸ a 
Hv ὁ καταλειφθείς, τρισχίλιοι πεζοὶ καὶ ἱππεῖς 
τριακόσιοι. 
A 5 
1Π. ᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἢ τε τάφρος αὐτοῖς ἐξείργαστο 
καὶ τὸ ἔρυμα τέλος εἶχεν αἵ τε οἰκήσεις τὰς 
» / A > / Ρ] / 3 ε 
ἀναγκαίους κατασκευὰς ἀπειλήφεσαν, ἀπήτει δ᾽ ὃ 
καιρὸς καὶ περὶ κόσμου πολιτείας ᾧ χρήσονται 
- ~ ¢€ 
σκοπεῖν, ἀγορὰν ποιησάμενος αὐτῶν ὁ “Ῥωμύλος 
ὑποθεμένου τοῦ μητροπάτορος καὶ διδάξαντος ἃ 
a ~ 
χρὴ λέγειν, τὴν μὲν πόλιν ἔφη ταῖς τε δημοσίαις 
καὶ ταῖς ἰδίαις κατασκευαῖς ὡς νεόκτιστον ἀπο- 
qn 9 ~ 
χρώντως κεκοσμῆσθαι: ἠξίου δ᾽ ἐνθυμεῖσθαι πάντας 
ὡς οὐ ταῦτ᾽ ἐστὶ τὰ πλείστου ἀξια ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν. 
” A > - » / / \ 4 
οὔτε yap ev Tots ὀθνείοις πολέμοις τὰς βαθείας 
vd \ \ 5 e A \ > / « A 4 nw 
τάφρους καὶ Ta? ὑψηλὰ ἐρύματα ἱκανὰ εἶναι τοῖς 
/ “- 
ἔνδον ἀπράγμονα σωτηρίας ὑπόληψιν παρασχεῖν, 
5 >, @ / > ~ θ A θὲ 5" > ὃ ~ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἕν τι μόνον ἐγγυᾶσθαι, To μηθὲν ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς 
A ς » >] ~ A 4 wf)? 
κακὸν ὑπ᾽ ἐχθρῶν παθεῖν προκαταληφθέντας, οὔθ 
A A ~ 
ὅταν ἐμφύλιοι ταραχαὶ TO κοινὸν κατάσχωσι, TOV 
5 A A 
ἰδίων οἴκων Kal ἐνδιαιτημάτων τὰς καταφυγὰς 
~ A > 
ὑπάρχειν τινὶ ἀκινδύνους. σχολῆς yap ἀνθρώποις 
ae ~ / 
ταῦτα Kat ῥᾳστώνης βίων ὃ εὑρῆσθαι παραμύθια, 
a ~ ~ 4 
μεθ᾽ ὧν οὔτε τὸ ἐπιβουλεῦον τῶν ὁ πέλας κωλύεσθαι 
4 ΕῚ \ 4 ye Dy SD ~ > ὃ / ͵ 
μὴ οὐ πονηρὸν εἶναι οὔτ᾽ ἐν τῷ ἀκινδύνῳ βεβηκέναι 
- / ,ὔ 
θαρρεῖν τὸ ἐπιβουλευόμενον, πόλιν τε οὐδεμίαν πω 


318 


BOOK II. 2, 4-3, 3 


became the founder of the city and called it after 
his own name. The great numbers of which the 
colony had originally consisted when sent out with 
him were now reduced to a few, the survivors 
amounting to three thousand foot and three hundred 
horse. 

Ill. When, therefore, the ditch was finished, the 
rampart completed and the necessary work on the 
houses done, and the situation required that they 
should consider also what form of government they 
were going to have, Romulus called an assembly of 
the people by the advice of his grandfather, who had 
instructed him what to say, and told them that 
the city, considering that it was newly built, was 
sufficiently adorned both with public and private 
buildings; but he asked them all to bear in mind that 
these were not the most valuable things in cities. 
For neither in foreign wars, he said, are deep ditches 
and high ramparts sufficient to give the inhabitants 
an undisturbed assurance of their safety, but guar- 
antee one thing only, namely, that they shall suffer no 
harm through being surprised by an incursion of the 
enemy ; nor, again, when civil commotions afflict the 
State, do private houses and dwellings afford anyone 
asaferetreat. For these have been contrived by men 
for the enjoyment of leisure and tranquillity in their 
lives, and with them neither those of their neigh- 
bours who plot against them are prevented from doing 
mischief nor do those who are plotted against feel any 
confidence that they are free from danger; and no 


1 αὐτῷ B: αὐτοῖς R. 2 τὰ added by Reiske. 
8 βίων Bb: βίου ABa. 4 τῶν Β: τῶ Α. 


919 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τούτοις ἐκλαμπρυνθεῖσαν ἐπὶ μήκιστον εὐδαίμονα 
γενέσθαι καὶ μεγάλην, οὐδ᾽ αὖ παρὰ τὸ μὴ τυχεῖν 
τινὰ κατασκευῆς ἰδίας τε καὶ δημοσίας πολυτελοῦς 
κεκωλῦσθαι μεγάλην γενέσθαι καὶ εὐδαίμονα ἀλλ᾽ 
ἕτερα εἶναι τὰ σώζοντα καὶ ποιοῦντα μεγάλας ἐκ 
μικρῶν τὰς πόλεις" ἐν μὲν τοῖς ὀθνείοις πολέμοις 
τὸ διὰ τῶν ὅπλων κράτος, τοῦτο δὲ τόλμῃ παρα- 
γίνεσθαι καὶ μελέτῃ, ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἐμφυλίοις ταραχαῖς 
τὴν τῶν πολιτευομένων ὁμοφροσύνην, ταύτην δὲ 
τὸν σώφρονα καὶ δίκαιον ἑκάστου βίον ἀπέφηνεν 
ἱκανώτατον ὄντα τῷ κοινῷ παρασχεῖν. τοὺς δὴ τὰ 
πολέμιά τε ἀσκοῦντας καὶ τῶν ' ἐπιθυμιῶν κρατοῦν- 
τας ἄριστα κοσμεῖν τὰς ἑαυτῶν πατρίδας τείχη τε 
ἀνάλωτα τῷ κοινῷ καὶ καταγωγὰς τοῖς ἑαυτῶν 
βίοις ἀσφαλεῖς τούτους εἶναι τοὺς παρασκευαζο- 
μένους. μαχητὰς δέ γε καὶ δικαίους ἄνδρας καὶ 
τὰς ἄλλας ἀρετὰς ἐπιτηδεύοντας τὸ τῆς πολιτείας 
σχῆμα ποιεῖν τοῖς φρονίμως αὐτὸ καταστησαμένοις, 
μαλθακούς τε αὖ καὶ πλεονέκτας καὶ δούλους ai- 
σχρῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν τὰ πονηρὰ ἐπιτηδεύματα ἐπιτελεῖν. 
ἐφη τε παρὰ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων καὶ διὰ “πολλῆς 
ἱστορίας ἐληλυθότων ἀκούειν, ὅτι πολλαὶ μὲν ἀποικίαι 
μεγάλαι καὶ εἰς εὐδαίμονας ἀφικόμεναι τόπους, αἱ 
μὲν αὐτίκα διεφθάρησαν εἰς στάσεις ἐμπεσοῦσαι, αἱ 
δ᾽ ὀλίγον ἀντισχοῦσαι χρόνον ὑπήκοοι τοῖς πλησιο- 
χώροις ἠναγκάσθησαν γενέσθαι καὶ ἀντὶ κρείττονος 
χώρας ἣν κατέσχον, τὴν χείρονα τύχην διαλλάξασθαι 
δοῦλαι ἐξ ἐλευθέρων γενόμεναι" ἕτεραι δ᾽ ὀλιγάν- 


1 τῶν Reiske: τὰ τῶν O. 


320 


BOOK II. 3, 3-6 


city that has gained splendour from these adorn- 
ments only has ever yet become prosperous and 
great for a long period, nor, again, has any city from 
a want of magnificence either in public or in private 
buildings ever been hindered from becoming great 
and prosperous. But it is other things that pre- 
serve cities and make them great from small be- 
ginnings: in foreign wars, strength in arms, which 
is acquired by courage and exercise; and in civil 
commotions, unanimity among the citizens, and 
this, he showed, could be most effectually achieved 
for the commonwealth by the prudent and just 
life of each citizen. Those who practise warlike 
exercises and at the same time are masters of 
their passions are the greatest ornaments to their 
country, and these are the men who provide 
both the commonwealth with impregnable walls 
and themselves in their private lives with safe 
refuges ; but men of bravery, justice and the other 
virtues are the result of the form of government 
when this has been established wisely, and, on the 
other hand, men who are cowardly, rapacious and 
the slaves of base passions are the product of evil 
institutions. He added that he was informed by 
men who were older and had wide acquaintance with 
history that of many large colonies planted in fruitful 
regions some had been immediately destroyed by fall- 
ing into seditions, and others, after holding out for 
a short time, had been forced to become subject to 
their neighbours and to exchange their more fruitful 
country for a worse fortune, becoming slaves instead 
of free men; while others, few in numbers and 


32] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


- / 
θρωποι Kal εἰς χωρία οὐ πάνυ σπουδαῖα παραγενό- 
~ > 
μεναι ἐλεύθεραι μὲν πρῶτον, ἔπειτα δ᾽ ἑτέρων 
ἄρχουσαι διετέλεσαν καὶ οὔτε ταῖς εὐπραγίαις τῶν 
ὀλίγων οὔτε ταῖς δυστυχίαις τῶν πολλῶν ἕτερόν τι 
~ ~ ” 
ἢ TO τῆς πολιτείας σχῆμα ὑπάρχειν αἴτιον. εἰ μὲν 
> 3 a f 
οὖν μία Tis ἦν παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις βίου τάξις ἡ 
ποιοῦσα εὐδαίμονας τὰς πόλεις, οὐ χαλεπὴν ἂν 
/ / \ Ὁ > ~ ~ > »Μ 
γενέσθαι σφίσι τὴν αἵρεσιν αὐτῆς- νῦν δ᾽ ἔφη 
πολλὰς πυνθάνεσθαι τὰς κατασκευὰς παρ᾽ “Ελλησί 
“ > a. 
τε καὶ βαρβάροις ὑπαρχούσας, τρεῖς δ᾽ ἐξ ἁπασῶν 
ἐπαινουμένας μάλιστα ὑπὸ τῶν χρωμένων ἀκούειν, 
καὶ τούτων οὐδεμίαν εἶναι τῶν πολιτειῶν εἰλικρινῆ, 
- ε / ~ 
προσεῖναι δέ τινας ἑκάστῃ κῆρας συμφύτους, ὥστε 
“- 4: 
χαλεπὴν αὐτῶν εἶναι τὴν αἵρεσιν. ἠξίου τε αὐτοὺς 
| ~ 3 - 
βουλευσαμένους ἐπὶ σχολῆς εἰπεῖν εἴτε ὑφ᾽ ἑνὸς ἄρ- 
, > \ ” e Asa ” , 
χεσθαι θέλουσιν ἀνδρὸς εἴτε ὑπ᾽ ὀλίγων εἴτε νόμους 
΄ 3 ~ \ ~ ~ 
καταστησάμενοι πᾶσιν ἀποδοῦναι τὴν τῶν κοινῶν 
/ ςς Ἔ: \ δ᾽ ὁ εχ κι. 155... Ἂν’ « A a A 1 
προστασίαν. γὼ δ᾽ bpiv,” ἔφη, ““ πρὸς ἣν ἂν 
καταστήσησθε πολιτείαν εὐτρεπής, καὶ οὔτε ἄρχειν 
- 3 ~ 
ἀπαξιῶ οὔτε ἄρχεσθαι ἀναίνομαι. τιμῶν δέ, ἅς 
ε / ~ > 
μοι προσεθήκατε ἡγεμόνα με πρῶτον ἀποδείξαντες 
~ \ ~ 
τῆς ἀποικίας, ἔπειτα καὶ TH πόλει THY ἐπωνυμίαν 
9». 3 > ~ / “ ” / A » 
ἐπ᾿ ἐμοῦ θέντες, ἅλις ἔχω. ταύτας γὰρ οὔτε 
7ὔ ε / + / > / »” ε 
πόλεμος ὑπερόριος οὔτε στάσις ἐμφύλιος οὔτε ὁ 
\ > 
πάντα μαραίνων τὰ καλὰ χρόνος ἀφαιρήσεταί pe 
οὔτε ἄλλη τύχη παλίγκοτος οὐδεμία: ἀλλὰ καὶ 
ζῶντι καὶ τὸν βίον ἐκλιπόντι τούτων ὑπάρξει μοι 
τῶν τιμῶν παρὰ πάντα τὸν λοιπὸν αἰῶνα τυγχάνειν. 


1 πρὸς ἣν av Portus: προσῆν ἐὰν A, πρὸς τὸ νέαν Β. 


922 


BOOK II. 3, 6-8 


settling in places that were by no means desirable. 
had continued, in the first place, to be free them- 
selves, and, in the second place, to command others ; 
and neither the successes of the smaller colonies nor 
the misfortunes of those that were large were due to 
any other cause than their form of government. If, 
therefore, there had been but one mode of life among 
all mankind which made cities prosperous, the choos- 
ing of it would not have been difficult for them; but, 
as it was, he understood there were many types of 
government among both the Greeks and barbarians, 
and out of all of them he heard three especially 
commended by those who had lived under them, 
and of these systems none was perfect, but each 
had some fatal defects inherent in it, so that the 
choice among them was difficult. He therefore asked 
them to deliberate at leisure and say whether they 
would be governed by one man or by a few, or whether 
they would establish laws and entrust the protection 
of the public interests to the whole body of the people. 
*“* And whichever form of government you establish,” 
he said, “1 am ready to comply with your desire, 
for I neither consider myself unworthy to command 
nor refuse to obey. So far as honours are concerned, 
I am satisfied with those you have conferred on 
me, first, by appointing me leader of the colony, and, 
again, by giving my name to the city. For of these 
neither a foreign war nor civil dissension nor time, 
that destroyer of all that is excellent, nor any other 
stroke of hostile fortune can deprive me; but both 
in life and in death these honours will be mine to 
enjoy for all time to come.” 


323 


lo 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ΓΝ Τοιαῦτα μὲν ὁ ἱΡωμύλος ἐκ διδαχῆς τοῦ 
μητροπάτορος, ὥσπερ ἔφην, ἀπομνημονεύσας ἐν 
A / ” € \ 4 \ 
tots πλήθεσιν ἔλεξεν. οἱ δὲ βουλευσάμενοι κατὰ 
~ » \ > / (ὃ ες" - / 
odds αὐτοὺς ἀποκρίνονται τοιάδε: ““᾿ Ἡμεῖς πολιτείας 
μὲν καινῆς οὐδὲν δεόμεθα, τὴν δ᾽ ὑπὸ τῶν πατέρων 
δοκιμασθεῖσαν εἶναι κρατίστην παραλαβόντες οὐ 
μετατιθέμεθα, γνώμῃ τε ἑπόμενοι τῶν παλαιοτέρων, 
ovs! ἀπὸ μείζονος οἰόμεθα φρονήσεως αὐτὴν κατα- 
στήσασθαι, καὶ τύχῃ ἀρεσκόμενοι οὐ γὰρ τήνδε 
μεμψαίμεθ᾽ ἂν εἰκότως, ἣ παρέσχεν ἡμῖν βασιλευο- 
μένοις τὰ μέγιστα τῶν ἐν ἀνθρώποις ἀγαθῶν, 
> / A », > / \ \ \ 
ἐλευθερίαν τε καὶ ἄλλων ἀρχήν. περὶ μὲν δὴ 
πολιτείας ταῦτα ἐγνώκαμεν: τὴν δὲ τιμὴν ταύτην 
οὐχ ἑτέρῳ τινὶ μᾶλλον ἢ σοὶ προσήκειν ὑπολαμ- 
βάνομεν τοῦ τε βασιλείου γένους ἕνεκα καὶ ἀρετῆς, 
μάλιστα δ᾽ ὅτι τῆς ἀποικίας ἡγεμόνι κεχρήμεθά 

\ \ / / \ \ 
σοι καὶ πολλὴν σύνισμεν δεινότητα, πολλὴν δὲ 
, > / ~ va ἮΝ / 32) “ 
σοφίαν, οὐ λόγῳ μᾶλλον ἢ ἔργῳ μαθόντες." ταῦτα 
ς ε / > / > aA \ ” / 
ὁ Ῥωμύλος ἀκούσας ἀγαπᾶν μὲν ἔφη βασιλείας 

” δ΄. 5 / / > / 7 

ἄξιος ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων κριθείς - οὐ μέντοι γε λήψεσθαι 
> 

τὴν τιμὴν πρότερον, ἐὰν μὴ καὶ TO δαιμόνιον ἐπι- 

θεσπίσῃ δι᾿ οἰωνῶν αἰσίων. 

V. ‘Qs δὲ κἀκείνοις ἦν βουλομένοις προειπὼν 
ἡμέραν, ev ἧ διαμαντεύσασθαι περὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς 
ἔμελλεν, ἐπειδὴ καθῆκεν ὁ χρόνος ἀναστὰς περὶ 
τὸν ὄρθρον ἐκ τῆς σκηνῆς προῆλθεν: στὰς δὲ 
ὑπαίθριος ἐν καθαρῷ χωρίῳ καὶ προθύσας ἃ νόμος 
ἦν εὔχετο Au τε βασιλεῖ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις θεοῖς, οὗς 


1 οὗς Steph.: ws O. 
324 


BOOK II. 4, 1-5, 1 


TV. Such was the speech that Romulus, following 
the instructions of his grandfather, as I have said, 
made to the people. And they, having consulted 
together by themselves, returned this answer: 
““ We have no need of a new form of government 
and we are not going to change the one which our 
ancestors approved of as the best and handed down 
to us. In this we show both a deference for the 
judgment of our elders, whose superior wisdom we 
recognize in establishing it, and our own satisfaction 
with our present condition. For we could not reason- 
ably complain of this form of government, which 
has afforded us under our kings the greatest of human 
blessings—liberty and the rule over others. Concern- 
ing the form of government, then, this is our decision; 
and to this honour we conceive none has so good a 
title as you yourself by reason both of your royal 
birth and of your merit, but above all because we 
have had you as the leader of our colony and recognize 
in you great ability and great wisdom, which we 
have seen displayed quite as much in your actions 
as in your words.” Romulus, hearing this, said it 
was a great satisfaction to him to be judged worthy 
of the kingly office by his fellow men, but that he 
would not accept the honour until Heaven, too. had 
given its sanction by favourable omens. 

V. And when the people approved, he appointed 
a day on which he proposed to consult the auspices 
concerning the sovereignty; and when the time 
was come, he rose at break of day and went forth 
from histent. Then, taking his stand under the open 
sky in a clear space and first offering the customary 
sacrifice, he prayed to King Jupiter and to the 


325 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἐποιήσατο τῆς ἀποικίας ἡγεμόνας, εἰ βουλομένοις 
αὐτοῖς ἐστι βασιλεύεσθαι τὴν πόλιν ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, 
σημεῖα οὐράνια φανῆναι καλά. μετὰ δὲ τὴν εὐχὴν 
ἀστραπὴ διῆλθεν ἐκ τῶν ἀριστερῶν ἐπὶ τὰ δεξιά. 
τίθενται δὲ Ρωμαῖοι τὰς ἐκ τῶν ἀριστερῶν ἐπὶ 
τὰ δεξιὰ ἀστραπὰς αἰσίους, εἴτε παρὰ Τυρρηνῶν 
διδαχθέντες, εἴτε πατέρων καθηγησαμένων, κατὰ 
τοιόνδε τινά, ὡς ἐγὼ πείθομαι, λογισμόν, ὅτι 
καθέδρα μέν ἐστι καὶ στάσις ἀρίστη τῶν οἰωνοῖς 
μαντευομένων ἡ βλέπουσα πρὸς ἀνατολάς, ὅθεν 
ἡλίου τε ἀναφοραὶ γίνονται καὶ σελήνης καὶ ἀστέ- 
ρων πλανήτων τε καὶ ἀπλανῶν, ἢ τε τοῦ κόσμου 
περιφορά, du ἣν τοτὲ μὲν ὑπὲρ γῆς ἅπαντα τὰ ἐν 
αὐτῷ γίνεται, τοτὲ δὲ ὑπὸ γῆς, ἐκεῖθεν ἀρξαμένη 
τὴν ἐγκύκλιον ἀποδίδωσι κίνησιν. τοῖς δὲ πρὸς 
ἀνατολὰς βλέπουσιν ἀριστερὰ μὲν γίνεται Ta) πρὸς 
τὴν ἄρκτον ἐπιστρέφοντα μέρη, δεξιὰ δὲ τὰ ' πρὸς 
μεσημβρίαν φέροντα: τιμιώτερα δὲ τὰ πρότερα 
πέφυκεν εἶναι τῶν ὑστέρων. μετεωρίζεται γὰρ 
ἀπὸ τῶν βορείων μερῶν ὁ τοῦ ἄξονος πόλος, περὶ 
ὃν ἡ τοῦ κόσμου στροφὴ γίνεται, καὶ τῶν πέντε 
κύκλων τῶν διεζωκότων τὴν σφαῖραν ὁ καλούμενος 
ἀρκτικὸς ἀεὶ τῇδε φανερός: ταπεινοῦται δ᾽ ἀπὸ 
τῶν νοτίων ὁ καλούμενος ἀνταρκτικὸς κύκλος 
ἀφανὴς κατὰ τοῦτο τὸ μέρος. εἰκὸς δὴ κράτιστα 
τῶν οὐρανίων καὶ μεταρσίων σημείων ὑπάρχειν, 
ὅσα ἐκ τοῦ κρατίστου γίνεται μέρους, ἐπειδὴ δὲ τὰ 
μὲν ἐστραμμένα πρὸς τὰς ἀνατολὰς ἡγεμονικωτέραν 
μοῖραν ἔχει τῶν προσεσπερίων, αὐτῶν δέ γε τῶν 
ἀνατολικῶν ὑψηλότερα τὰ βόρεια τῶν νοτίων, ταῦτα 
17a added by Sylburg. 
326 


BOOK IT. 5, 1-4 


other gods whom he had chosen for the patrons of 
the colony, that, if it was their pleasure he should 
be king of the city, some favourable signs might 
appear in the sky. After this prayer a flash of 
lightning darted across the sky from the left to the 
right. Now the Romans look upon the lightning 
that passes from the left to the right as a favourable 
omen, having been thus instructed either by the 
Tyrrhenians or by their own ancestors. Their 
reason is, In my opinion, that the best seat and 
station for those who take the auspices is that which 
looks toward the east, from whence both the sun 
and the moon rise as well as the planets and fixed 
stars ; and the revolution of the firmament, by which 
all things contained in it are sometimes above the 
earth and sometimes beneath it, begins its circular 
motion thence. Now to those who look toward 
the east the parts! facing toward the north are on 
the left and those extending toward the south are 
on the right, and the former are by nature more 
honourable than the latter. For in the northern 
parts the pole of the axis upon which the firmament 
turns is elevated, and of the five zones which girdle 
the sphere the one called the arctic zone is always 
visible on this side; whereas in the southern parts 
the other zone, called the antarctic, is depressed and 
invisible on that side. So it is reasonable to assume 
that those signs in the heavens and in mid-air are 
the best which appear on the best side; and since 
the parts that are turned toward the east have 
preéminence over the western parts, and, of the 
eastern parts themselves, the northern are higher than 


1“ Parts ” in this chapter means regions of the sky. 


327 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


δ av εἴη κράτιστα ὡς δέ τινες ἱστοροῦσιν ἐκ παλαιοῦ 
τε καὶ πρὶν ἢ παρὰ Τυρρηνῶν μαθεῖν τοῖς Ρωμαίων 
προγόνοις αἴσιοι ἐνομίζοντο αἱ ἐκ τῶν ἀριστερῶν 
ἀστραπαί. ᾿Ασκανίῳ γὰρ τῷ ἐξ Αἰνείου γεγονότι, 
καθ᾽ ὃν χρόνον ὑπὸ Τυρρηνῶν, ots ἦγε βασιλεὺς 
Μεσέντιος, ἐπολεμεῖτο καὶ τειχήρης ἦν, περὶ τὴν 
τελευταίαν ἔξοδον, ἣν ἀπεγνωκὼς ἤδη τῶν πραγ- 
μάτων ἔμελλε ποιεῖσθαι, μετ᾽ ὀλοφυρμοῦ τόν τε 
Δία καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους αἰτουμένῳ θεοὺς αἴσια σημεῖα 
δοῦναι τῆς ἐξόδου φασὶν αἰθρίας οὔσης ἐκ τῶν 
ἀριστερῶν ἀστράψαι τὸν οὐρανόν. τοῦ δ᾽ ἀγῶνος 
ἐκείνου λαβόντος τὸ κράτιστον τέλος διαμεῖναι παρὰ 
τοῖς ἐκγόνοις αὐτοῦ νομιζόμενον αἴσιον τόδε τὸ 
σημεῖον. 

V1. Τότε δ᾽ οὖν ὁ Ῥωμύλος ἐπειδὴ τὰ παρὰ τοῦ 
δαιμονίου βέβαια προσέλαβε, συγκαλέσας τὸν δῆμον 
εἰς ἐκκλησίαν καὶ τὰ μαντεῖα δηλώσας βασιλεὺς 
ἀποδείκνυται πρὸς αὐτῶν καὶ κατεστήσατο ἐν ἔθει 
τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτὸν ἅπασι μήτε βασιλείας μήτε ἀρχὰς 
λαμβάνειν, ἐὰν μὴ καὶ τὸ δαιμόνιον αὐτοῖς ἐπι- 
θεσπίσῃ, διέμεινέ τε μέχρι πολλοῦ φυλαττόμενον 
ὑπὸ Ρωμαίων τὸ περὶ τοὺς οἰωνισμοὺς νόμιμον, οὐ 
μόνον βασιλευομένης τῆς πόλεως, ἀλλὰ καὶ μετὰ 
κατάλυσιν τῶν μονάρχων ἐν ὑπάτων καὶ στρατηγῶν 
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν κατὰ νόμους ἀρχόντων αἱρέσει. 

2 πέπαυται δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς χρόνοις, πλὴν οἷον 
εἰκών τις αὐτοῦ λείπεται τῆς ὁσίας αὐτῆς ' ἕνεκα 
γινομένη ἐπαυλίζονται μὲν γὰρ οἱ τὰς ἀρχὰς 
μέλλοντες λαμβάνειν καὶ περὶ τὸν ὄρθρον ἀνιστά- 


‘Steph,*; ταύτης Ὁ. 
328 


BOOK II. 5, 5-6, 2 


the southern, the former would seem to be the best. 
But some relate that the ancestors of the Romans 
from very early times, even before they had learned 
it from the Tyrrhenians, looked upon the lightning 
that came from the left as a favourable omen. For 
they say that when Ascanius, the son of Aeneas, was 
warred upon and besieged by the Tyrrhenians led 
by their king Mezentius, and was upon the point 
of making a final sally out of the town, his situation 
being now desperate, he prayed with lamentations 
to Jupiter and to the rest of the gods to encourage 
this sally with favourable omens, and thereupon 
out of a clear sky there appeared a flash of lightning 
coming from the left; and as this battle had the 
happiest outcome, this sign continued to be regarded 
as favourable by his posterity. 

VI. When Romulus, therefore, upon the occasion 
mentioned had received the sanction of Heaven also, 
he called the people together in assembly ; and having 
given them an account of the omens, he was chosen 
king by them and established it as a custom, to 
be observed by all his successors, that none of them 
should accept the office of king or any other magis- 
tracy until Heaven, too, had given its sanction. 
And this custom relating to the auspices long 
continued to be observed by the Romans, not only 
while the city was ruled by kings, but also, after the 
overthrow of the monarchy, in the elections of their 
consuls, praetors and other legal magistrates ; but it 
has fallen into disuse in our days except as a certain 
semblance of it remains merely for form’s sake. 
For those who are about to assume the magistracies 
pass the night out of doors, and rising at break of 


329 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μενοι ποιοῦνταί τινας εὐχὰς ὑπαίθριοι, τῶν δὲ 
΄ ~ 
παρόντων τινὲς ὀρνιθοσκόπων μισθὸν ἐκ τοῦ δη- 
/ / > \ b) ~ / 1 >? 
μοσίου φερόμενοι ἀστραπὴν αὐτοῖς σημαίνειν ἐκ 
~ 5 ~ 
τῶν ἀριστερῶν φασιν τὴν οὐ γενομένην. οἱ δὲ τὸν 
> ~ 
ἐκ τῆς φωνῆς οἰωνὸν λαβόντες ἀπέρχονται τὰς 
ἀρχὰς παραληψόμενοι οἱ μὲν αὐτὸ τοῦθ᾽ ἱκανὸν 
ὑπολαμβάνοντες εἶναι τὸ μηδένα γενέσθαι τῶν 
ἐναντιουμένων τε καὶ κωλυόντων οἰωνῶν, οἱ δὲ 
‘ ~ ~ 
καὶ παρὰ τὸ βούλημα τοῦ θεοῦ, ἔστι yap ὅτε 
, \ \ > A ε / ~ x“ 
βιαζόμενοι Kat τὰς ἀρχὰς ἁρπάζοντες μᾶλλον ἢ 
5 ~ 
λαμβάνοντες. δι᾽ ods πολλαὶ μὲν ἐν γῇ στρατιαὶ 
« / 
Pwpaiwy ἀπώλοντο πανώλεθροι, πολλοὶ δ᾽ ἐν θα- 
7 / 
λάττῃ στόλοι διεφθάρησαν αὔτανδροι, ἄλλαι τε pe- 
γάλαι καὶ δειναὶ περιπέτειαι ὃ τῇ πόλει συνέπεσον at 
\ > > / / ¢ \ \ A > / 
μὲν ev ὀθνείοις πολέμοις, at δὲ κατὰ Tas ἐμφυλίους 
/ > / \ \ / A \ 
διχοστασίας, ἐμφανεστάτη δὲ Kal μεγίστη" κατὰϑ THY 
> \ ε / 4 / ~ =, > A 
ἐμὴν ἡλικίαν, ὅτε Λικίνιος Κρᾶσσος ἀνὴρ οὐδενὸς 
δεύτερος τῶν καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ἡγεμόνων στρατιὰν ἦγεν 
ἐπὶ τὸ ΠΠ]}άρθων ἔθνος, ἐναντιουμένου τοῦ δαιμονίου 
πολλὰ χαίρειν φράσας τοῖς ἀποτρέπουσι τὴν ἔξοδον 
~ > 5 \ A 
οἰωνοῖς μυρίοις ὅσοις γενομένοις. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν 
= ~ > 
τῆς εἰς TO δαιμόνιον ὀλιγωρίας, ἧ χρῶνταΐί τινες ἐν 
A ~ ” / 
τοῖς καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς χρόνοις, πολὺ ἔργον av εἴη λέγειν. 
~ A 
VIL. ‘O δὲ ἹΡωμύλος ἀποδειχθεὶς τοῦτον τὸν 
~ A / 
τρόπον ὑπό Te ἀνθρώπων Kal θεῶν βασιλεὺς τά 
: ; i φιλοκίνδ ἡμολογεῖται 5 
τε πολέμια δεινὸς καὶ φιλοκίνδυνος ὁμολογεῖται 


1 Cobet: μηνύειν Ο, Jacoby. Perhaps σημῆναι is the true 


form. 
> Schwartz: τοῦ θεοῦ κωλύοντος O, Jacoby. 
8 περιπέτειαι Bb: om. ABa. Steph. added συμφοραὶ Paton 


μεγάλαι. 


330 


BOOK II. 6, 2-7, 1 


day, offer certain prayers under the open sky ; where- 
upon some of the augurs present, who are paid by 
the State, declare that a flash of lightning coming 
from the left has given them a sign, although there 
really has not been any. And the others, taking 
their omen from this report, depart in order to take 
over their magistracies, some of them assuming 
this alone to be sufficient, that no omens have 
appeared opposing or forbidding their intended 
action, others acting even in opposition to the will 
of the god; indeed, there are times when they 
resort to violence and rather seize than receive the 
magistracies. Because of such men many armies 
of the Romans have been utterly destroyed on land, 
many fleets have been lost with all their people at 
sea, and other great and dreadful reverses have 
befallen the commonwealth, some in foreign wars 
and others in civil dissensions. But the most re- 
markable and the greatest instance happened in 
my time when Licinius Crassus, a man inferior to 
no commander of his age, led his army against the 
Parthian nation contrary to the will of Heaven and 
in contempt of the innumerable omens that opposed 
his expedition. But to tell about the contempt of 
the divine power that prevails among some people 
in these days would be a long story. 

VII. Romulus, who was thus chosen king by 
both men and gods, is allowed to have been a man 
of great military ability and personal bravery and 





_ 


4Reiske : ἐμφανέσταται δὲ καὶ μέγισται O. 
δ κατὰ Ambrosch: καὶ κατὰ O, Jacoby. 
8 ὁμολογεῖται R: ὡμολόγηται Β. 


331 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


γενέσθαι καὶ πολιτείαν ἐξηγήσασθαι τὴν κρατίστην 
φρονιμώτατος. διέξειμι δ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὰς πράξεις τάς 
τε πολιτικὰς καὶ tas! κατὰ πολέμους, ὧν καὶ 
λόγον ἄν τις ἐν ἱστορίας ἀφηγήσει ποιήσαιτο. ἐρῶ 
δὲ πρῶτον ὑπὲρ τοῦ κόσμου τῆς πολιτείας, ὃν ἐγὼ 
πάντων ἡγοῦμαι πολιτικῶν κόσμων αὐταρκέστατον 
ἐν εἰρήνῃ τε καὶ κατὰ πολέμους. ἦν δὲ τοιόσδε: 
τριχῇ νείμας τὴν πληθὺν ἅπασαν ἑκάστῃ τῶν μοιρῶν 
τὸν ἐπιφανέστατον ἐπέστησεν ἡγεμόνα. ἔπειτα τῶν 
τριῶν πάλιν μοιρῶν ἑκάστην εἰς δέκα μοίρας διελών, 
ἴσους ἡγεμόνας καὶ τούτων ἀπέδειξε τοὺς ἀνδρειοτά- 
tous’ ἐκάλει δὲ τὰς μὲν μείζους μοίρας τρίβους, 
τὰς δ᾽ ἐλάττους κουρίας, ὡς καὶ κατὰ τὸν ἡμέτερον 
βίον ἔτι προσαγορεύονται. εἴη δ᾽ ἂν ᾿λλάδι γλώττῃ 
τὰ ὀνόματα ταῦτα μεθερμηνευόμενα φυλὴ μὲν καὶ 
τριττὺς ἡ τρίβος,Σ φράτρα δὲ καὶ λόχος ἡ κουρία, 
καὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν οἱ μὲν τὰς τῶν τρίβων ἡγεμονίας 
ἔχοντες φύλαρχοί τε καὶ τριττύαρχοι, οὗς καλοῦσι 
“Ῥωμαῖοι tpiBovvous: οἱ δὲ ταῖς κουρίαις ἐφεστη- 
κότες καὶ φρατρίαρχοι καὶ λοχαγοί, ovs ἐκεῖνοι 
κουρίωνας ὀνομάζουσι. διήρηντο δὲ καὶ εἰς δεκάδας 
αἱ φρᾶτραι πρὸς αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἡγεμὼν ἑκάστην ἐκόσμει 
δεκάδα, δεκουρίων κατὰ τὴν ἐπιχώριον γλῶτταν 
προσαγορευόμενος. wes δὲ διεκρίθησαν ἅπαντες καὶ 
συνετάχθησαν εἰς φυλὰς καὶ φράτρας, διελὼν τὴν 


᾿ τὰς added by Sy!burg. * τρίβος R: τριβους B, Jacoby. 





1 Dionysius is here thinking of these divisions of the 
people both as political and military units. The ordinary 
Greek equivalent of “ tribe”’ is phylé, but etymologically 
trittys is probably the same word as tribus, both originally 


332 


BOOK II. 7, 1-4 


of the greatest sagacity in instituting the best kind 
of government. I shall relate such of his political 
and military achievements as may be thought worthy 
of mention in a history; and first I shall speak of 
the form of government that he instituted, which 
I regard as the most self-sufficient of all political 
systems both for peace and for war. This was the 
plan of it: He divided all the people into three 
groups, and set over each as leader its most dis- 
tinguished man. Then he subdivided each of these 
three groups into ten others, and appointed as many 
of the bravest men to be the leaders of these also. 
The larger divisions he called tribes and the smaller 
curiae, as they are still termed even in our day. 
These names may be translated into Greek as follows: 
a tribe by phyle and trittys, and a curia by phratra 
and lochos!; the commanders of the tribes, whom 
the Romans call tribunes, by phylarchoi and tritty- 
archoi; and the commanders of the curiae, whom 
they call curiones, by phratriarchoi and lochagot. 
These curiae were again divided by him into ten 
parts, each commanded by its own leader, who was 
called decurio in the native language. The people 
being thus divided and assigned to tribes and curiae, 


meaning a “third’’; in actual practice, however, trittys 
was used of the third of a tribe. Phratra or phratria, 
** brotherhood ”’ or “‘ clan,’ was also the third of a tribe, 
and the phratries in their organization and rites offer a 
number of parallels to the curiae (ef. chap. 23). Lochos 
is a military term, “company ”’ of indefinite size. The 
phylarchot were the commanders of the cavalry contingents 
furnished by each tribe, and the lochagoi were infantry 
captains. The trittyarchot and phratriarchoi were simply 
the heads of their respective political divisions. 


333 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


γῆν εἰς τριάκοντα κλήρους ἴσους ἑκάστῃ φράτρᾳ 
κλῆρον ἀπέδωκεν ἕνα, ἐξελὼν τὴν ἀρκοῦσαν εἰς ἱερὰ 
\ ζω ~ ~ 
Kal τεμένη καί τινα Kal τῷ κοινῷ γῆν καταλιπών. 
/ \ σ΄ / e \ « / ~ 
μία μὲν αὕτη διαίρεσις ὑπὸ Ῥωμύλου τῶν τε 
ἀνδρῶν καὶ τῆς χώρας ἡ ' περιέχουσα τὴν κοινὴν 
καὶ μεγίστην ἰσότητα, τοιάδε τις ἦν. 
«ς ~ ~ ~ 
VIII. ‘Erépa δὲ αὐτῶν πάλιν τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἡ τὰ 
φιλάνθρωπα καὶ τὰς τιμὰς διανέμουσα κατὰ τὴν 
»"46, Δ / ~ \ > - A 
ἀξίαν, ἣν μέλλω διηγεῖσθαι. τοὺς ἐπιφανεῖς κατὰ 
γένος καὶ δι᾿ ἀρετὴν ἐπαινουμένους καὶ χρήμασιν ὡς 
ἐν τοῖς τότε καιροῖς εὐπόρους, οἷς ἤδη παῖδες ἦσαν, 
διώριζεν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀσήμων καὶ ταπεινῶν καὶ ἀπόρων. 
> / \ \ \ > ~ / , / 
ἐκάλει δὲ τοὺς μὲν ἐν TH καταδεεστέρᾳ τύχῃ πληβεί- 
ε 3᾽ Ὁ “ Μ ΄ ‘ > 
ous, ws δ᾽ av Ἕλληνες εἴποιεν δημοτικούς " τοὺς ὃ 
ἐν τῇ κρείττονι πατέρας εἴτε διὰ τὸ πρεσβεύειν 
.« 
ε / ~ 7 ΜΩ9 Ὁ - Ε] = “3 
ἡλικίᾳ τῶν ἄλλων, εἴθ᾽ ὅτι παῖδες αὐτοῖς ἦσαν, 
εἴτε διὰ τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν τοῦ γένους, εἴτε διὰ πάντα 
ταῦτα: ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αθηναίων πολιτείας, ὡς ἄν τις 
~ ~ » 
εἰκάσειε, τῆς κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον ἔτι διαμενούσης 
τὸ παράδειγμα λαβών. ἐκεῖνοι μὲν γὰρ εἰς δύο μέρη 
~ > 
νείμαντες TO πλῆθος εὐπατρίδας μὲν ἐκάλουν τοὺς ἐκ 
~ ~ / © 
τῶν ἐπιφανῶν οἴκων καὶ χρήμασι δυνατούς, οἷς ἡ 
- 3 , , 
τῆς πόλεως ἀνέκειτο προστασία, ἀγροίκους δὲ τοὺς 
a ~ ~ \ 4» / 
ἄλλους πολίτας, ol τῶν κοινῶν οὐδενὸς ἦσαν κύριοι" 


1 ἡ added by Ambrosch. 





1 Both the Latin plebeius and the Greek démotikos are 
adjectives, ‘‘ belonging to the plebs or démos.” 


334 


BOOK II. 7, 4-8, 2 


he divided the land into thirty equal portions and as- 
signed one of them to each curia, having first set apart 
as much of it as was sufficient for the support of the 
temples and shrines and also reserved some part of 
the land for the use of the public. This was one 
division made by Romulus, both of the men and 
of the land, which involved the greatest equality 
for all alike. 

VIII. But there was another division again of 
the men only, which assigned kindly services and 
honours in accordance with merit, of which I am now 
going to give an account. He distinguished those 
who were eminent for their birth, approved for their 
virtue and wealthy for those times, provided they 
already had children, from the obscure, the lowly 
and the poor. Those of the lower rank he called 
** plebeians ”’ (the Greeks would call them démotikoi } 
or ““men of the people ”’), and those of the higher 
rank “ fathers,”’ either because they were older than 
the others or because they had children or from their 
distinguished birth or for all these reasons. One 
may suspect that he found his model in the system 
of government which at that time still prevailed 
at Athens. For the Athenians had divided their 
population into two parts, the eupatridai or “ well- 
born,” as they called those who were of the noble 
families and powerful by reason of their wealth, 
to whom the government of the city was committed, 
and the agroikoi? or “‘husbandmen,” consisting of 
the rest of the citizens, who had no voice in public 


? Called also ge6moroi or gedrgoi. 


335 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


σὺν χρόνῳ δὲ Kal οὗτοι προσελήφθησαν ἐπὶ τὰς 
> ΧΡ “ \ \ A / P 7 A Kj € / " 
ἀρχάς. οἱ μὲν δὴ τὰ πιθανώτατα περὶ τῆς Ῥωμαίων 
πολιτείας ἱστοροῦντες διὰ ταύτας τὰς αἰτίας κληθῆ- 
vai φασι τοὺς avdpas ἐκείνους πατέρας καὶ τοὺς 
~ « 
ἐκγόνους αὐτῶν πατρικίους, οἱ δὲ πρὸς τὸν ἴδιον 
/ > / \ ~ \ / 
φθόνον ἀναφέροντες TO πρᾶγμα Kat διαβάλλοντες 
εἰς δυσγένειαν τὴν πόλιν οὐ διὰ ταῦτα πατρικίους 
54 oe = ἢ 5ᾺᾺ) {0 7 > 
ἐκείνους κληθῆναί φασιν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι πατέρας εἶχον 
> Q a / ε ~ Μ ~ ᾿, 
ἀποδεῖξαι μόνοι, ὡς τῶν γε ἄλλων δραπετῶν ὄντων 
καὶ οὐκ ἐχόντων ὀνομάσαι πατέρας ἐλευθέρους. 
\ 
τεκμήριον δὲ τούτου παρέχονται, ὅτι τοὺς μὲν 
πατρικίους, ὁπότε δόξειε τοῖς βασιλεῦσι συγκαλεῖν, 
ot κήρυκες ἐξ ὀνόματός τε καὶ πατρόθεν ἀνηγόρευον, 
τοὺς δὲ δημοτικοὺς ὑπηρέται τινὲς ἀθρόους ? κέρασι 
~ > > ~ 
βοείοις ἐμβυκανῶντες ἐπὶ Tas ἐκκλησίας συνῆγον. 
ἔστι δὲ οὔτε ἡ τῶν κηρύκων ἀνάκλησις τῆς εὐγενείας 
΄ / ” ¢ ~ / 

TOV πατρικίων τεκμήριον, οὔτε ἡ τῆς βυκάνης φωνὴ 
~ > / ~ ~ / > +e) / 
τῆς ἀγνωσίας τῶν δημοτικῶν σύμβολον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνη 

~ e/ Α͂ν 
μὲν τιμῆς, αὕτη δὲ τάχους. οὐ γὰρ olovTe ἦν ἐν 
5Ὰ " / \ \ ΄- > > / 
ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ THY πληθὺν καλεῖν ἐξ ὀνόματος. 
IX. ὋὉ δὲ Ῥωμύλος ἐπειδὴ διέκρινε τοὺς κρείτ- 
τους ἀπὸ τῶν ἡττόνων, ἐνομοθέτει μετὰ τοῦτο καὶ 
΄ c ‘ 
διέταττεν, ἃ χρὴ πράττειν ἑκατέρους" τοὺς μὲν 
~ \ / A 
εὐπατρίδας ἱερᾶσθαί τε Kal ἄρχειν καὶ δικάζειν καὶ 


1 Schwartz: παρέχουσιν O, Jacoby. 
2 Reiske: ἀθρόοι AB. 





1 Dionysius ignores the démiourgoi (artisans), the third 
class of the three into which Theseus, according to tradition, 
divided the population. 


336 


BOOK II. 8, 2-9, 1 


affairs, though in the course of time these, also, were 
admitted to the offices.1_ Those who give the most 
probable account of the Roman government say 
it was for the reasons I have given that those men 
were called “fathers” and their posterity “ patri- 
cians ’’*; but others, considering the matter in the 
light of their own envy and desirous of casting re- 
proach on the city for the ignoble birth of its founders, 
say they were not called patricians for the reasons 
just cited, but because these men only could point 
out their fathers,®—as if all the rest were fugitives and 
unable to name free men as their fathers. As proof 
of this they cite the fact that, whenever the kings 
thought proper to assemble the patricians, the 
heralds called them both by their own names and 
by the names of their fathers, whereas public ser- 
vants summoned the plebeians en masse to the 
assemblies by the sound of ox horns. But in reality 
neither the calling of the patricians by the heralds is 
any proof of their nobility nor is the sound of the 
horn any mark of the obscurity of the plebeians ; 
but the former was an indication of honour and the 
latter of expedition, since it was not possible in a 
short time to call every one of the multitude by name. 

IX. After Romulus had distinguished those of 
superior rank from their inferiors, he next established 
laws by which the duties of each were prescribed. 
The patricians were to be priests, magistrates and 


? This is the explanation given by Livy (i. 8, 7). 

δ Cf. Livy x. 8, 10 (part of a speech): patricios ... 
qui patrem ciere possent, id est nihil ultra quam ingenuos. 
This derivation of patricius from pater and cieo is a good 
instance of Roman etymologizing at its worst. 


me 
VOL. I. N 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ τὰ κοινὰ πράττειν ἐπὶ τῶν κατὰ πόλιν ! 
ἔργων μένοντας, τοὺς δὲ δημοτικοὺς τούτων μὲν 
ἀπολελύσθαι τῶν πραγματειῶν ἀπείρους τε αὐτῶν 
ὄντας καὶ δι᾿ ἀπορίαν χρημάτων ἀσχόλους, γεωργεῖν 
δὲ καὶ κτηνοτροφεῖν καὶ τὰς χρηματοποιοὺς ἐργά- 
ζεσθαι τέχνας, ἵνα μὴ στασιάζωσιν, ὥσπερ ἐν ταῖς 
ἄλλαις πόλεσιν, ἢ τῶν ἐν τέλει προπηλακιζόντων 
τοὺς ταπεινοὺς ἢ τῶν φαύλων καὶ ἀπόρων τοῖς ἐν 
ταῖς ὑπεροχαῖς φθονούντων. παρακαταθήκας δὲ 
ἔδωκε τοῖς πατρικίοις τοὺς δημοτικοὺς ἐπιτρέψας 
ἑκάστῳ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ πλήθους, ὃν αὐτὸς ἐβούλετο, 
νέμειν προστάτην, ἔθος ᾿ Ελληνικὸν καὶ ἀρχαῖον, ᾧ 
Θετταλοί τε μέχρι πολλοῦ χρώμενοι διετέλεσαν 
καὶ ᾿Αθηναῖοι κατ᾽ ἀρχάς, ἐπὶ τὰ κρείττω λαβών. 
ἐκεῖνοι μὲν γὰρ ὑπεροπτικῶς ἐχρῶντο τοῖς πελάταις 
ἔργα τε ἐπιτάττοντες οὐ προσήκοντα ἐλευθέροις, καὶ 
ὁπότε μὴ πράξειάν τι τῶν κελευομένων, πληγὰς 
ἐντείνοντες καὶ τἄλλα ὥσπερ ἀργυρωνήτοις παρα- 
χρώμενοι. ἐκάλουν δὲ ᾿Αθηναῖοι μὲν θῆτας τοὺς 
πελάτας ἐπὶ τῆς λατρείας, Θετταλοὶ δὲ πενέστας 
ὀνειδίζοντες αὐτοῖς εὐθὺς ἐν τῇ κλήσει τὴν τύχην. 
ὁ δὲ Ῥωμύλος ἐπικλήσει τε εὐπρεπεῖ τὸ πρᾶγμα 
ἐκόσμησε πατρωνείαν ὀνομάσας τὴν τῶν πενήτων 
καὶ ταπεινῶν προστασίαν, καὶ τὰ ἔργα χρηστὰ 
προσέθηκεν ἑκατέροις, καὶ φιλανθρώπους καὶ πολι- 
τικὰς ἀπεργαζόμενος ὥ αὐτῶν τὰς συζυγίας. 


1 πόλιν Ο: τὴν πόλιν Reiske, Jacoby. ἃ 
2 Kiessling: ἐργαζόμενος Β, κατασκευαζόμενος A, Jacoby. 


998 


BOOK II. 9, 1-3 


judges, and were to assist him in the management 
of public affairs, devoting themselves to the business 
of the city. The plebeians were excused from these 
duties, as being unacquainted with them and because 
of their small means wanting leisure to attend to 
them, but were to apply themselves to agriculture, 
the breeding of cattle and the exercise of gainful 
trades. This was to prevent them from engaging 
in seditions, as happens in other cities when either 
the magistrates mistreat the lowly, or the common 
people and the needy envy those in authority. He 
placed the plebeians as a trust in the bands of the 
patricians, by allowing every plebeian to choose 
for his patron any patrician whom he himself 
wished. In this he improved upon an ancient 
Greek custom that was in use among the Thessalians 
for a long time and among the Athenians in the 
beginning. For the former treated their clients 
with haughtiness, imposing on them duties un- 
becoming to free men; and whenever they dis- 
obeyed any of their commands, they beat them 
and misused them in all other respects as if they 
had been slaves they had purchased. The Athenians 
called their clients thétes or “hirelings,” because 
they served for hire, and the Thessalians called 
theirs penestai or “toilers,’ by the very name 
reproaching them with their condition. But 
Romulus not only recommended the relationship 
by a handsome designation, calling this protection 
of the poor and lowly a “ patronage,” but he also 
assigned friendly offices to both parties, thus making 
the connexion between them a bond of kindness 
befitting fellow citizens. 


339 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> \ \ er > ΄ / ε ΄ ᾿ 
Ην δὲ τὰ ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου τότε ὁρισθέντα καὶ 
/ ~ / / «ε 7ὔ ” 
μέχρι πολλοῦ παραμείναντα χρόνου “Ῥωμαίοις ἔθη 
περὶ τὰς πατρωνείας τοιάδε: τοὺς μὲν πατρικίους 
ΝΜ - ε ~ / > A Ἁ ea 
ἔδει Tots ἑαυτῶν πελάταις ἐξηγεῖσθαι τὰ δίκαια, ὧν 
οὐκ εἶχον ἐκεῖνοι τὴν ἐπιστήμην, παρόντων τε αὐτῶν 
καὶ μὴ παρόντων τὸν αὐτὸν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τρόπον 
4 
ἅπαντα πράττοντας, ὅσα περὶ παίδων πράττουσι 
πατέρες, εἰς χρημάτων τε καὶ τῶν περὶ χρήματα 
συμβολαίων λόγον: δίκας τε ὑπὲρ τῶν πελατῶν 
ἀδικουμένων λαγχάνειν, εἴ τις βλάπτοιτο περὶ τὰ 
συμβόλαια, καὶ τοῖς ἐγκαλοῦσιν ὑπέχειν: ὡς δὲ 
ὀλίγα περὶ πολλῶν ἄν τις εἴποι, πᾶσαν αὐτοῖς 
~ \ ~ ~ 
εἰρήνην τῶν Te ἰδίων Kal τῶν κοινῶν πραγμάτων, 
- / > / / \ \ / 
ἧς μάλιστα ἐδέοντο, παρέχειν. τοὺς δὲ πελάτας 
ἔδει τοῖς ἑαυτῶν προστάταις θυγατέρας τε συνεκ- 
/ ¢ 
δίδοσθαι yapovpevas, εἰ σπανίζοιεν ot πατέρες 
\ Av / A / 
χρημάτων, καὶ λύτρα καταβάλλειν πο εμίοις, 
εἴ τις αὐτῶν ἢ παίδων αἰχμάλωτος γένοιτο" 
δίκας τε ἁλόντων ἰδίας ἢ ζημίας ὀφλόντων δημοσίας 
> ~ 
ἀργυρικὸν ἐχούσας τίμημα ἐκ τῶν ἰδίων λύεσθαι 
χρημάτων, οὐ δανείσματα ποιοῦντας, ἀλλὰ χάριτας" 
A 
ἔν τε ἀρχαῖς καὶ γερηφορίαις καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις 
ταῖς εἰς τὰ κοινὰ δαπάναις τῶν ἀναλωμάτων 
/ - 
ὡς τοὺς γένει προσήκοντας μετέχειν. κοινῇ δ᾽ 
a ΕΝ / io ~ 
ἀμφοτέροις οὔτε ὅσιον οὔτε θέμις ἦν κατηγορεῖν 
σῷ / a“ A μὴ - 
ἀλλήλων ἐπὶ δίκαις ἢ καταμαρτυρεῖν ἢ ψῆφον 
1 ΤῊ word does not occur elsewhere, but two inscrip- 
tions have yielded the adjectival forms γερηφόρος and 
γερεαφόρος ; see the latest revision of Liddell and Scott’s 


Lexicon. Kiessling proposed to read tepadopias, and Jacoby 
(in a note) τελεσφορίαις. 


340 


BOOK II. 10, 1-3 


X. The regulations which he then instituted 
concerning patronage and which long continued in 
use among the Romans were as follows: It was the 
duty of the patricians to explain to their clients the 
laws, of which they were ignorant ; to take the same 
care of them when absent as present, doing every- 
thing for them that fathers do for their sons with 
regard both to money and to the contracts that 
related to money; to bring suit on behalf of their 
clients when they were wronged in connexion with con- 
tracts, and to defend them against any who brought 
charges against them; and, to put the matter 
briefly, to secure for them both in private and in 
public affairs all that tranquillity of which they 
particularly stood in need. It was the duty of the 
clients to assist their patrons in providing dowries 
for their daughters upon their marriage if the fathers 
had not sufficient means ; to pay their ransom to the 
enemy if any of them or of their children were taken 
prisoner ; to discharge out of their own purses their 
patrons’ losses in private suits and the pecuniary 
fines which they were condemned to pay to the 
State, making these contributions to them not as 
loans but as thank-offerings; and to share with 
their patrons the costs incurred in their magistracies 
and dignities) and other public expenditures, in the 
same manner as if they were their relations. For 
both patrons and clients alike it was impious and 
unlawful to accuse each other in law-suits or to bear 


1 The word yepndopia should mean literally the “‘ bearing, 
or enjoyment, of privileges,’’ hence ἃ “ position of honour”’ 
or a “dignity.’’ Presumably the reference is to priest- 
hoods. 


341 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> / > , Ἃ A ~ > ~ > / 
ἐναντίαν ἐπιφέρειν ἢ μετὰ τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἐξετάζεσθαι. 
εἰ δέ τις ἐξελεγχθείη τούτων τι διαπροττόμενος 
ἔνοχος ἦν τῷ νόμῳ τῆς προδοσίας, ὃν ἐκύρωσεν 
ε ~ 
ὁ ἹῬωμύλος, τὸν δὲ ἁλόντα τῷ βουλομένῳ κτείνειν 
σ Ss e 63 ~ θ / A / > “0 1 
ὅσιον ἦν ws θῦμα τοῦ καταχθονίου Aids. ev ἔθει 
‘ ς / <4 > / \ 7 
yap Ρωμαίοις, ὅσους ἐβούλοντο νηποινὶ τεθνάναι, 
~ Fd - 
τὰ τούτων σώματα θεῶν ὁτῳδήτινι, μάλιστα δὲ τοῖς 
/ / “a A / σι, 4 / 
καταχθονίοις κατονομάζειν: ὃ καὶ τότε ὁ Ῥωμύλος 
ἐποίησε. τοιγάρτοι διέμειναν ἐν πολλαῖς γενεαῖς 
~ > 
οὐδὲν διαφέρουσαι συγγενικῶν ἀναγκαιοτήτων αἱ 
τῶν πελατῶν τε καὶ προστατῶν συζυγίαι παισὶ 
> A > 
παίδων συνιστάμεναι, Kal μέγας ἔπαινος ἦν τοῖς EK 
τῶν ἐπιφανῶν οἴκων ὡς πλείστους πελάτας ἔχειν 
τάς τε προγονικὰς φυλάττουσι διαδοχὰς τῶν πα- 
- - ~ ~ > 
τρωνειῶν Kal διὰ THs ἑαυτῶν ἀρετῆς ἄλλας ἐπικτω- 
2 ~ / \ ~ A 
μένοις, O TE ἀγὼν τῆς edvolas® ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ 
- ~ > / / A ς / 
λειφθῆναι τῆς ἀλλήλων χάριτος ἔκτοπος ἡλίκος 
> A ~ A ~ 
ἀμφοτέροις ἦν, τῶν μὲν πελατῶν ἅπαντα τοῖς 
/ > 
προστάταις ἀξιούντων ws δυνάμεως εἶχον ὑὕπηρε- 
- - σ - 
τεῖν, τῶν δὲ πατρικίων ἥκιστα βουλομένων τοῖς 
- / / A 
πελάταις ἐνοχλεῖν χρηματικήν τε οὐδεμίαν δωρεὰν 
A ε / = A 
προσιεμένων: οὕτως ἐγκρατὴς ὁ βίος ἦν αὐτοῖς 
~ > ~ ~ 
ἁπάσης ἡδονῆς Kal TO μακάριον ἀρετῇ μετρῶν, οὐ 
/ 
τύχῃ. ἪΝ ι 
> / 5 Az ~ / ‘ 
XI. Οὐ μόνον δ᾽ ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ πόλει TO δημοτικὸν 
\ / ~ / δ > \ ‘ 
ὑπὸ τὴν προστασίαν τῶν πατρικίων ἦν, ἀλλὰ Kal 
1 ἐν ἔθει Kiessling: ἔνθεν Ο. 
2 τῆς εὐνοίας Kiessling: ὑπὲρ τῆς εὐνοίας O; om. Cobet. 


342 


BOOK II. 10, 3-11. 1 


witness or to give their votes against each other or 
to be found in the number of each other’s enemies ; 
and whoever was convicted of doing any of these 
things was guilty of treason by virtue of the law 
sanctioned by Romulus, and might lawfully be put 
to death by any man who so wished as a victim 
devoted to the Jupiter of the infernal regions.! 
For it was customary among the Romans, whenever 
they wished to put people to death without incurring 
any penalty, to devote their persons to some god 
or other, and particularly to the gods of the lower 
world ; and this was the course which Romulus then 
adopted. Accordingly, the connexions between the 
clients and patrons continued for many generations, 
differing in no wise from the ties of blood-relation- 
ship and being handed down to their children’s 
children. And it was a matter of great praise to 
men of illustrious families to have as many clients 
as possible and not only to preserve the succession 
of hereditary patronages but also by their own merit 
to acquire others. And it is incredible how great 
the contest of goodwill was between the patrons and 
clients, as each side strove not to be outdone by the 
othe: in kindness, the clients feeling that they should 
render all possible services to their patrons and the 
patrons wishing by all means not to occasion any 
trouble to their clients and accepting no gifts of 
money. So superior was their manner of life to 
all pleasure ; for they measured their happiness by 
virtue, not by fortune. 

XI. It was not only in the city itself that the 
plebeians were under the protection of the patricians, 


152,6. Dis or Pluto. 


343 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τῶν ἀποίκων αὐτῆς πόλεων Kal TOV ἐπὶ συμμαχίᾳ 
καὶ φιλίᾳ προσελθουσῶν καὶ τῶν ἐκ πολέμου κε- 
κρατημένων ἑκάστη φύλακας εἶχε καὶ προστάτας 
οὗς ἐβούλετο Ῥωμαίων. καὶ πολλάκις ἡ βουλὴ τὰ 
ἐκ τούτων ἀμφισβητήματα τῶν πόλεων καὶ ἐθνῶν 
ἐπὶ τοὺς προϊσταμένους αὐτῶν ἀποστέλλουσα, τὰ 
im ἐκεύων δικασθέντα κύρια ἡγεῖτο. οὕτω δὲ 
ἄρα βέβαιος ἦν ἡ Ῥωμαίων ὁμόνοια τὴν ἀρχὴν 
ἐκ τῶν ὑπὸ Ῥωμύλου κατασκευασθέντων λαβοῦσα 
ἐθῶν, ὥστε οὐδέποτε δι᾽ αἵματος καὶ φόνου τοῦ 
κατ᾽ ἀλλήλων ἐχώρησαν ἐντὸς ἑξακοσίων καὶ τριά- 
κοντα ἐτῶν, πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων ἀμφισβητημάτων 
γενομένων τῷ δήμῳ πρὸς τοὺς ἐν τέλει περὶ τῶν 
κοινῶν, ὡς ἐν ἁπάσαις φιλεῖ γίγνεσθαι μικραῖς τε 
καὶ μεγάλαις πόλεσιν - ἀλλὰ Ts HOVE Sh καὶ διδάσκον- 
τες ἀλλήλους καὶ τὰ μὲν εἴκοντες, τὰ δὲ παρ᾽ 
εἰκόντων Σ λαμβάνοντες, πολιτικὰς ἐποιοῦντο τὰς 
τῶν ἐγκλημάτων διαλύσεις. ἐξ οὗ δὲ Γάιος ράκχος 
ἐπὶ τῆς δημαρχικῆς ἐξουσίας γενόμενος διέφθειρε 
τὴν τοῦ πολιτεύματος ἁρμονίαν, οὐκέτι πέπαυνται 
σφάττοντες ἀλλήλους καὶ φυγάδας ἐλαύνοντες ἐκ 
τῆς πόλεως καὶ οὐδενὸς τῶν ἀνηκέστων ἀπεχόμενοι 
παρὰ τὸ νικᾶν. ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων ἕτερος ἔσται 
τοῖς λόγοις καιρὸς ἐπιτηδειότερος. 

XII. ‘O δὲ Ῥωμύλος ἐπειδὴ ταῦτα διεκόσμησε 
βουλευτὰς εὐθὺς ἔγνω καταστήσασθαι, μεθ᾽ ὧν 


1 εἴκοντες R: ἑκόντες Bb. 
2 εἰκόντων Reiske: ἑκόντων Ο. 





1 Dionysius ignores the bloodshed in connexion with 
the slaying of Tiberius Gracchus in 133 and the execution 


344 


BOOK II. 11, 1-12, 1 


but every colony of Rome and every city that had 
joined in alliance and friendship with her and also 
every city conquered in war had such protectors 
and patrons among the Romans as they wished. 
And the senate has often referred the controversies 
of these cities and nations to their Roman patrons 
and regarded their decisions as binding. And in- 
deed, so secure was the Romans’ harmony, which 
owed its birth to the regulations of Romulus, that 
they never in the course of six hundred and thirty 
years ! proceeded to bloodshed and mutual slaughter, 
though many great controversies arose between the 
populace and their magistrates concerning public 
policy, as is apt to happen in all cities, whether large 
or small; but by persuading and informing one 
another, by yielding in some things and gaining 
other things from their opponents, who yielded in 
turn, they settled their disputes in a manner be- 
fitting fellow citizens. But from the time that 
Gaius Gracchus, while holding the  tribunician 
power, destroyed the harmony of the government 
they have been perpetually slaying and banishing 
one another from the city and refraining from no 
irreparable acts in order to gain the upper hand. 
However, for the narration of these events another 
occasion will be more suitable. 

XII. As? soon as Romulus had regulated these 
matters he determined to appoint senators to assist 


of many Gracchans that followed. The overthrow of 
Gaius Gracchus occurred at the very beginning of the 
year 121, which was the year 631 of the City according to 
Dionysius’ reckoning. 

2 Cf. Livy i. 8, 7. 


345 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


πράττειν τὰ Kowa ἔμελλεν, ἐκ τῶν πατρικίων ἄν- 
dpas ἑκατὸν ἐπιλεξάμενος. ἐποιεῖτο δὲ αὐτῶν 
τοιάνδε τὴν διαίρεσιν: αὐτὸς μὲν ἐξ ἁπάντων ἕνα 
τὸν ἄριστον ἀπέδειξεν, ᾧ τὰς κατὰ πόλιν ᾧετο δεῖν 
ἐπιτρέπειν οἰκονομίας, ὅτε αὐτὸς ἐξάγοι στρατιὰν 
ὑπερόριον: τῶν δὲ φυλῶν ἑκάστῃ προσέταξε τρεῖς 
ἄνδρας ἑλέσθαι τοὺς ἐν τῇ φρονιμωτάτῃ τότε ὄντας 
ἡλικίᾳ καὶ δι᾿ εὐγένειαν ἐπιφανεῖς. μετὰ δὲ τοὺς 
ἐννέα τούτους ἑκάστην φράτραν" πάλιν ἐκέλευσε 
τρεῖς ἐκ τῶν πατρικίων ἀποδεῖξαι 5 τοὺς ἐπι- 
τηδειοτάτους" ἔπειτα τοῖς πρώτοις ἐννέα τοῖς ὑπὸ 
τῶν φυλῶν ἀποδειχθεῖσι τοὺς ἐνενήκοντα προσθείς, 
οὗς αἱ φρᾶτραι προεχειρίσαντο, καὶ τούτων, ὃν 
αὐτὸς προέκρινεν, ἡγεμόνα ποιήσας τὸν τῶν ἑκατὸν 
ἐξεπλήρωσε βουλευτῶν ἀριθμόν. τοῦτο τὸ συνέ- 
δριον 38 ᾿Ελληνιστὶ ἑρμηνευόμενον γερουσίαν δύναται 
δηλοῦν καὶ μέχρι τοῦ παρόντος ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων 
οὕτως καλεῖται. πότερον δὲ διὰ γῆρας τῶν κατα- 
λεγέντων εἰς αὐτὸ ἀνδρῶν ἢ δι᾽ ἀρετὴν ταύτης 
ἔτυχε τῆς ἐπικλήσεως οὐκ ἔχω τὸ σαφὲς εἰπεῖν. 
καὶ γὰρ τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους καὶ τοὺς ἀρίστους 
γέροντας εἰώθεσαν οἱ παλαιοὶ καλεῖν. ot δὲ μετέ- 
χοντες τοῦ βουλευτηρίου πατέρες ἔγγραφοι προση- 
γορεύθησαν καὶ μέχρις ἐμοῦ ταύτης ἐτύγχανον τῆς 
προσηγορίας. ᾿Ελληνικὸν δὲ ἄρα καὶ τοῦτο τὸ 
ἔθος ἦν. τοῖς γοῦν βασιλεῦσιν, ὅσοι τε πατρίους 
1 Jacoby: ἑκάστῃ φράτρᾳ Ο. 
2 Kiessling: ἐπιλέξαι Ο. 


8 After συνέδριον Reiske supplied ἐκάλει σενᾶτον ὃ. 
4 τὸ added by Kiessling. 


346 


BOOK II. 12, 1-4 


him in administering the public business, and to this 
end he chose a hundred men from among the pa- 
tricians, selecting them in the following manner. 
He himself appointed one, the best out of their 
whole number, to whom he thought fit to entrust 
the government of the city whenever he himself 
should lead the army beyond the borders. He 
next ordered each of the tribes to choose three men 
who were then at the age of greatest prudence and 
were distinguished by their birth. After these nine 
were chosen he ordered each curia likewise to name 
three patricians who were the most worthy. Then 
adding to the first nine, who had been named by 
the tribes, the ninety who were chosen by the curiae, 
and appointing as their head the man he himself 
had first selected, he completed the number of a 
hundred senators. The name of this council may 
be expressed in Greek by gerousia or “ council of 
elders,” and it is called by the Romans to this 
day *; but whether it received its name from the ad- 
vanced age of the men who were appointed to it or 
from their merit, I cannot say for certain. For the 
ancients used to call the older men and those of 
greatest merit gerontes or “‘ elders.” The members 
of the senate were called Conscript*® Fathers, and 
they retained that name down to my time. This 
council, also, was a Greek institution. At any rate, 
the Greek kings, both those who inherited the realms 

1 The reference is to the praefectus urbi. 22,6. senatus. 


3 Literally, “‘enrolled.’’ For the usual explanation of 
Patres Conscripti see Livy ii. 1, 11. 


347 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἀρχὰς παραλάβοιεν Kat ὅσους ἡ πληθὺς αὐτὴ 
καταστήσαιτο ἡγεμόνας, βουλευτήριον ἦν ἐκ τῶν 
κρατίστων, ὡς “Ὅμηρός τε καὶ οἱ παλαιότατοι τῶν 
ποιητῶν μαρτυροῦσι: καὶ οὐχ ὥσπερ ἐν τοῖς καθ᾽ 
ἡμᾶς χρόνοις αὐθάδεις καὶ μονογνώμονες ἦσαν αἱ 
τῶν ἀρχαίων βασιλέων δυναστεῖαι. 

XIII. ‘Qs δὲ κατεσκευάσατο καὶ τὸ βουλευτικὸν 
τῶν γερόντων συνέδριον ἐκ τῶν ἑκατὸν ἀνδρῶν, 
ὁρῶν ὅπερ εἰκὸς ὅτι καὶ νεότητος αὐτῷ δεήσει 
τινὸς συντεταγμένης, ἧ χρήσεται φυλακῆς ἕνεκα 
τοῦ σώματος καὶ πρὸς TO. κατεπείγοντα τῶν ἔργων 
ὑπηρεσίᾳ, τριακοσίους ἄνδρας ἐκ τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων 
οἴκων τοὺς ἐρρωμενεστάτους τοῖς σώμασιν ἐπιλεξά- 
μενος, οὗς ἀπέδειξαν αἱ φρᾶτραι τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον 
ὅνπερ τοὺς βουλευτάς, ἑκάστη φράτρα δέκα νέους," 
τούτους τοὺς ἄνδρας ἀεὶ περὶ αὑτὸν εἶχεν: ὄνομα δὲ 
κοινὸν ἅπαντες οὗτοι ἔσχον " κελέριοι, ὡς μὲν οἱ 
πλείους γράφουσιν ἐπὶ τῆς ὀξύτητος τῶν ὑπηρεσιῶν 
(τοὺς γὰρ ἑτοίμους καὶ ταχεῖς περὶ τὰ ἔργα κέλερας 
οἱ Ρωμαῖοι καλοῦσιν), ὡς δὲ Οὐαλέριος ὁ ᾿Αντιεύς 
φησιν ἐπὶ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος αὐτῶν τοῦτ᾽ ἔχοντος τοὔ- 
νομα. ἦν γὰρ καὶ τούτων ἡγεμὼν ὁ διαφανέστατος, 
ᾧ τρεῖς ὑπετάγησαν ἑκατόνταρχοι ὃ καὶ αὖθις ὑπ᾽ 
ἐκείνοις ἕτεροι τὰς ὑποδεεστέρας ἔχοντες ἀρχάς, οἵ 
κατὰ πόλιν μὲν αἰχμοφόροι τε αὐτῷ παρηκολούθουν 
καὶ τῶν κελευομένων ὑπηρέται, κατὰ δὲ τὰς στρα- 
τείας πρόμαχοί τε ἦσαν καὶ παρασπισταί" καὶ τὰ 

1 ἑκάστη... νέους deleted by Kiessling. 

2 ἅπαντες οὗτοι ἔσχον B: ἅπαντες ὃ καὶ νῦν κατέστησεν ἔσχον 


A; ἅπαντες ὅσοι συγκατέστησαν Reiske. 
3 Kiessling: ἑκατοντάρχαι O. 


348 


BOOK IT. 12, 4-13. 3 


of their ancestors and those who were elected by the 
people themselves to be their rulers, had a council 
composed of the best men, as both Homer and the 
most ancient of the poets testify: and the authority 
of the ancient kings was not arbitrary and absolute 
as it is in our days. 

XIII. After’ Romulus had also instituted the 
senatorial body, consisting of the hundred men, 
he perceived, we may suppose, that he would also 
require a body of young men whose services he 
could use both for the guarding of his person and 
for urgent business, and accordingly he chose three 
hundred men, the most robust of body and from the 
most illustrious families, whom the curiae named 
in the same manner that they had named the 
senators, each curia choosing ten young men; and 
these he kept always about his person. They were 
all called by one common name, celeres ; according 
to most writers this was because of the “ celerity ” 
required in the services they were to perform (for 
those who are ready and quick at their tasks the 
Romans call celeres), but Valerius Antias says that 
they were thus named after their commander. For 
among them, also, the most distinguished man was 
their commander; under him were three centurions, 
and under these in turn were others who held the 
inferior commands. In the city these celeres con- 
stantly attended Romulus, armed with spears, and 
executed his orders ; and on campaigns they charged 
before him and defended his person. And as a 

1 Cf. Livy i. 15, 8. 
349 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


πολλὰ οὗτοι κατώρθουν ἐν τοῖς ἀγῶσι πρῶτοί τε 
» / \ - - Μ > / 
ἄρχοντες μάχης Kal τελευταῖοι τῶν ἄλλων ἀφιστά- 
ε - 
μενοι, ἱππεῖς μὲν ἔνθα ἐπιτήδειον εἴη πεδίον ἐνιπ- 
πομαχῆσαι, πεζοὶ δὲ ὅπου τραχὺς εἴη καὶ ἄνιππος 
τόπος. τοῦτό μοι δοκεῖ παρὰ Μ“ακεδαιμονίων 
3:13 
μετενέγκασθαι τὸ ἔθος μαθὼν ὅτι καὶ παρ᾽ ἐκείνοις 
ε ~ = 
οἱ γενναιότατοι τῶν νέων τριακόσιοι φύλακες ἦσαν 
τῶν βασιλέων, οἷς ἐχρῶντο κατὰ τοὺς πολέμους 
a ε a "Ὃν - 
παρασπισταῖς, ἱππεῦσί τε οὖσι καὶ πεζοῖς. 
XIV. Karacornodpevos δὴ ταῦτα διέκρινε τὰς 
A \ \ > / “a ε / > / ΝΜ) 
τιμὰς καὶ τὰς ἐξουσίας, ἃς ἑκάστους ἐβούλετο ἔχειν. 
- Ss ~ A 
βασιλεῖ μὲν οὖν ἐξήρητο τάδε τὰ γέρα" πρῶτον μὲν 
ε ~ ~ > 
ἱερῶν καὶ θυσιῶν ἡγεμονίαν ἔχειν καὶ πάντα δι 
ἐκείνου πράττεσθαι τὰ πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς ὅσια, ἔπειτα 
~ \ “- 
νόμων τε καὶ πατρίων ἐθισμῶν φυλακὴν ποιεῖσθαι 
“ Ἃ / 
Kal παντὸς τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν ἢ κατὰ συνθήκας δικαίου 
προνοεῖν τῶν τε ἀδικημάτων τὰ μέγιστα μὲν αὐτὸν 
> ~ - 
δικάζειν, τὰ δ᾽ ἐλάττονα τοῖς βουλευταῖς ἐπιτρέπειν 
- 
προνοούμενον ἵνα μηδὲν γίγνηται περὶ τὰς δίκας 
΄ / / \ ~ ~ 
πλημμελές, βουλήν τε συνάγειν καὶ δῆμον συγκαλεῖν 
~ / 
Kal γνώμης ἄρχειν καὶ τὰ δόξαντα τοῖς πλείοσιν 
- ~ A \ 
ἐπιτελεῖν. ταῦτα μὲν ἀπέδωκε βασιλεῖ τὰ γέρα καὶ 
> 
ETL πρὸς τούτοις ἡγεμονίαν ἔχειν αὐτοκράτορα ἐν 
΄ “ \ / > lo \ \ 
πολέμῳ. τῷ δὲ συνεδρίῳ τῆς βουλῆς τιμὴν καὶ 
/ > 4 \ \ A Ἃ 
δυναστείαν ἀνέθηκε τοιάνδε: περὶ παντὸς ὅτου ἂν 
εἰσηγῆται βασιλεὺς διαγινώσκειν τε καὶ ψῆφον ἐπι- 
͵ - - - > 
φέρειν, καὶ 6 τι ἂν δόξῃ τοῖς πλείοσι τοῦτο νικᾶν ἐκ 
τῆς ακωνικῆς πολιτείας καὶ τοῦτο μετενεγκάμενος. 
᾽ \ ‘ c / - > / 
οὐδὲ yap οἱ Λακεδαιμονίων βασιλεῖς αὐτοκράτορες 


350 


BOOK II. 13, 3-14, 2 


rule it was they who gave a favourable issue to the 
contest, as they were the first to engage in battle 
and the last of all to desist. They fought on horse- 
back where there was level ground favourable for 
cavalry manceuvres, and on foot where it was 
rough and inconvenient for horses. This custom 
Romulus borrowed, I believe, from the Lacedae- 
monians, having learned that among them, also, 
three hundred of the noblest youths attended the 
kings as their guards and also as their defenders in 
war, fighting both on horseback and on foot. 

XIV. Having made these regulations, he distin- 
guished the honours and powers which he wished 
each class to have. For the king he had reserved 
these prerogatives: in the first place, the supremacy 
in religious ceremonies and sacrifices and the con- 
duct of everything relating to the worship of the 
gods; secondly, the guardianship of the laws and 
customs of the.country and the general oversight 
of justice in all cases, whether founded on the law 
of nature or the civil law; he was also to judge in 
person the greatest crimes, leaving the lesser to 
the senators, but seeing to it that no error was made 
in their decisions; he was to summon the senate 
and call together the popular assembly, to deliver 
his opinion first and carry out the decision of the 
majority. These prerogatives he granted to the 
king and, in addition, the absolute command in 
war. ‘To the senate he assigned honour and author- 
ity as follows: to deliberate and give their votes 
concerning everything the king should refer to 
them, the decision of the majority to prevail. This 
also Romulus took over from the constitution of the 
Lacedaemonians ; for their kings, too, did not have 


351 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ον 4 ΄ ΄ὔ > 3... Ἔ / “- 
ἦσαν ὃ τι βούλοιντο πράττειν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ γερουσία πᾶν 
> ~ ~ \ / ~ \ ~ ’ 
εἶχε τῶν κοινῶν τὸ κράτος. τῷ δὲ δημοτικῷ πλήθει 
, ~ > / > / \ / 
τρία ταῦτα ἐπέτρεψεν" ἀρχαιρεσιάζειν τε καὶ νόμους 
ἐπικυροῦν καὶ περὶ πολέμου διαγινώσκειν, ὅταν 6 
\ > ~ 2 \ / 3, \ > / 
βασιλεὺς ἐφῇ, οὐδὲ τούτων ἔχοντι τὴν ἐξουσίαν 
» λ nv“ A \ ~ β λῆ ᾽ A 5 - 
ἀνεπίληπτον, av μὴ καὶ τῇ βουλῇ ταὐτὰ δοκῇ. 
ἔφερε δὲ τὴν ψῆφον οὐχ ἅμα πᾶς ὁ δῆμος, ἀλλὰ 
κατὰ τὰς φράτρας συγκαλούμενος- 6 τι δὲ ταῖς 
/ / / ~ > A \ \ 
πλείοσι δόξειε φράτραις τοῦτο ἐπὶ τὴν βουλὴν 
> , 3, 5. τὸ ἧι \ 7 \ #9 > 
ἀνεφέρετο. ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν δὲ μετάκειται τὸ ἔθος" οὐ 
A ε A 7 4 / ε A ~ 
yap ἡ βουλὴ διαγινώσκει τὰ ψηφισθέντα ὑπὸ τοῦ 
7 ~ > sis \ ~ a / ς ~ / 
δήμου, τῶν δ᾽ ὑπὸ τῆς βουλῆς γνωσθέντων 6 δῆμός 
ἐστι κύριος" πότερον δὲ τῶν ἐθῶν κρεῖττον, ἐν 
πὰ μι - > A ~ 
κοινῷ τίθημι τοῖς βουλομένοις σκοπεῖν. ἐκ δὲ τῆς 
\ vA 
διαιρέσεως ταύτης οὐ μόνον τὰ πολιτικὰ πράγματα 
A / 
σώφρονας ἐλάμβανε καὶ τεταγμένας Tas διοικήσεις, 
- ¢ 
ἀλλὰ Kal Ta πολεμικὰ ταχείας καὶ εὐπειθεῖς. ὁπότε 
- > / ” Ψ 
γὰρ αὐτῷ φανείη στρατιὰν ἐξάγειν, οὔτε χιλιάρχους 
a ¢ 
τότε ἔδει ἀποδείκνυσθαι κατὰ φυλὰς οὔτε ἕκατον- 
ε ͵ ε / a” 
tapyous | κατὰ λόχους οὔτε ἱππέων ἡγεμόνας οὔτε 
- \ / ¢ 7 
ἐξαριθμεῖσθαί τε καὶ λοχίζεσθαι καὶ τάξιν ἑκάστους 
A / A / ᾿ ἰλλὰ λ \ \ A 
τὴν προσήκουσαν λαμβάνειν - ἀλλὰ βασιλεὺς μὲν τοῖς 
> “A \ A - 
χιλιάρχοις παρήγγελλεν, ἐκεῖνοι δὲ τοῖς λοχαγοῖς " 
/ eA 
παρὰ δὲ τούτων οἱ Sexddapyor? μαθόντες ἐξῆγον 
a 2.79 ΕΓ 
τοὺς ὑποτεταγμένους ἑαυτοῖς ἕκαστοι, ap ἕνός τε 
~ 7 ” ΄ / > 
κελεύσματος εἴτε πᾶσα ἡ δύναμις εἴτε μοῖρά τις ἐξ 


1 ἑκατοντάρχους B: ἑκατοντάρχας R. 


2Sylburg: δεκάρχαι A, δεκαδάρχαι Β. 
992 


BOOK II. 14, 2-4 


arbitrary power to do everything they wished, but 
the gerousia exercised complete control of public 
affairs. To the populace he granted these three 
privileges: to choose magistrates, to ratify laws, 
and to decide concerning war whenever the king 
left the decision to them; yet even in these matters 
their authority was not unrestricted, since the con- 
currence of the senate was necessary to give effect 
to their decisions. The people did not give their 
votes all at the same time, but were summoned to 
meet by curiae, and whatever was resolved upon by 
the majority of the curiae was reported to the senate. 
But in our day this practice is reversed, since the 
senate does not deliberate upon the resolutions 
passed by the people, but the people have full power 
over the decrees of the senate; and which of the 
two customs is the better I leave it open to others 
to determine. By this division of authority not 
only were the civil affairs administered in a prudent 
and orderly manner, but the business of war also 
was carried on with dispatch and strict obedience. 
For whenever the king thought proper to lead out 
his army there was then no necessity for tribunes to 
be chosen by tribes, or centurions by centuries, or 
commanders of the horse appointed, nor was it 
necessary for the army to be numbered or to be 
divided into centuries or for every man to be assigned 
to his appropriate post. But the king gave his orders 
to the tribunes and these to the centurions and they 
in turn to the decurions, each of whom led out those 
who were under his command; and whether the 
whole army or part of it was called, at a single 


353 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


αὐτῆς KAnbein τὰ ὅπλα ἔχουσα παρῆν εἰς Tov 
ἀποδειχθέντα τόπον εὐτρεπής. 

Χν. Τεταγμένην μὲν οὖν καὶ κεκοσμημένην πρὸς 
εἰρήνην τε ἀποχρώντως καὶ πρὸς τὰ πολέμια ἐ ἐπιτη- 
δείως ἐκ τούτων τῶν πολιτευμάτων τὴν πόλιν ὃ 
Ῥωμύλος a ἀπειργάσατο, μεγάλην. δὲ καὶ πολυάνθρω- 
πον ἐκ τῶνδε: πρῶτον “μὲν εἰς ἀνάγκην κατέστησε 
τοὺς οἰκήτορας αὐτῆς ἅπασαν ἄρρενα γενεὰν ἐκτρέ- 
φειν καὶ θυγατέρων τὰς πρωτογόνους, ἀποκτιννύναι 
δὲ μηδὲν τῶν γεννωμένων νεώτερον τριετοῦς, πλὴν 
εἴ τι γένοιτο παιδίον ἀνάπηρον ἢ τέρας εὐθὺς ἀπὸ 
γονῆς. ταῦτα δ᾽ οὐκ ἐκώλυσεν ἐκτιθέναι τοὺς γεινα- 
μένους ἐπιδείξαντας πρότερον πέντε ἀνδράσι τοῖς 
ἔγγιστα οἰκοῦσιν, ἐὰν κἀκείνοις συνδοκῇ. κατὰ δὲ 
τῶν μὴ πειθομένων τῷ νόμῳ ζημίας ὥρισεν ἄλλας 
τε καὶ τῆς οὐσίας αὐτῶν τὴν ἡμίσειαν εἶναι δη- 
μοσίαν. ἔπειτα καταμαθὼν πολλὰς τῶν κατὰ τὴν 
᾿Ιταλίαν πόλεων πονηρῶς ἐπιτροπευομένας ὑπὸ 
τυραννίδων τε καὶ ὀλιγαρχιῶν, τοὺς ἐκ τούτων 
ἐκπίπτοντας τῶν πόλεων συχνοὺς ὄντας, εἰ μόνον 
εἶεν ἐλεύθεροι, διακρίνων οὔτε συμφορὰς οὔτε τύχας 
αὐτῶν ὑποδέχεσθαι καὶ μετάγειν ὡς ἑαυτὸν ἐπε- 
χείρει, τήν τε ' Ρωμαίων δύναμιν αὐξῆσαι βουληθεὶς 
καὶ τὰς τῶν περιοίκων ἐλαττῶσαι ἐποίει δὲ ταῦτα 
πρόφασιν ἐξευρὼν εὐπρεπῆ καὶ εἰς θεοῦ τιμὴν τὸ 
ἔργον ἀναφέρων. τὸ γὰρ μεταξὺ χωρίον τοῦ τε 
Καπιτωλίου καὶ τῆς ἄκρας, ὃ καλεῖται νῦν κατὰ 

“Ρωμαίων διάλεκτον μεθόριον δυεῖν δρυμῶν 
καὶ ἦν τότε τοῦ συμβεβηκότος ἐπώνυμον, ὕλαις 
ἀμφιλαφέσι κατ᾽ ἀμφοτέρας τὰς συναπτούσας τοῖς 


304 


BOOK IT. 14, 4-15, 4 


summons they presented themselves ready with arms 
in hand at the designated post. 

XV. By these institutions Romulus sufficiently 
regulated and suitably disposed the city both for 
peace and for war; and he made it large and populous 
by the following means. In the first place, he obliged 
the inhabitants to bring up all their male children 
and the first-born of the females, and forbade them 
to destroy any children under three years of age 
unless they were maimed or monstrous from their 
very birth. These he did not forbid their parents 
to expose, provided they first showed them to their 
five nearest neighbours and these also approved. 
Against those who disobeyed this law he fixed various 
penalties, including the confiscation of half their 
property. Secondly, finding that many of the cities 
in Italy were very badly governed, both by tyrannies 
and by oligarchies, he undertook to welcome and 
attract to himself the fugitives from these cities, who 
were very numerous, paying no regard either to 
their calamities or to their fortunes, provided only 
they were free men. His purpose was to increase 
the power of the Romans and to lessen that of their 
neighbours ; but he invented a specious pretext for 
his course, making it appear that he was showing 
honour to a god. For he consecrated the place be- 
tween the Capitol and the citadel which is now 
called in the language of the Romans “ the space 
between the two groves,” 1—a term that was really 
descriptive at that time of the actual conditions, as 
the place was shaded by thick woods on both sides 


1 enter duos lucos; cf. Livy i. 8, 5-6. 
355 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ / 2 / ε \ > \ Μ ς / 
λόφοις λαγόνας ἐπίσκιον, ἱερὸν ἀνεὶς ἄσυλον ἱκέταις 
καὶ ναὸν ἐπὶ τούτῳ κατασκευασάμενος (ὅτῳ δὲ ἄρα 

~ “A ~ - 
θεῶν ἢ δαιμόνων οὐκ ἔχω τὸ σαφὲς εἰπεῖν) τοῖς 

~ ¢ ~ 
καταφεύγουσιν εἰς τοῦτο TO ἱερὸν ἱκέταις τοῦ τε 
μηδὲν κακὸν ὑπ᾽ ἐχθρῶν παθεῖν ἐγγυητὴς ἐγίνετο 
~ ᾽ \ 7 ᾿] / / \ > / 
τῆς εἰς TO θεῖον εὐσεβείας προφάσει Kat εἰ βούλοιντο 
παρ᾽ αὐτῷ μένειν πολιτείας μετεδίδου καὶ γῆς 

- 1 Δ / / 5» «ς \ 

μοῖραν, ἣν κτήσαιτο πολεμίους ἀφελόμενος. ot δὲ 
> A 
συνέρρεον ἐκ παντὸς τόπου τὰ οἰκεῖα φεύγοντες 
κακὰ καὶ οὐκέτι ἑτέρωσε ἀπανίσταντο ταῖς καθ᾽ 
ἡμέραν ὁμιλίαις καὶ χάρισιν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ κατεχόμενοι. 
XVI. Τρίτον ἦν ἔτι ᾿Ρωμύλου πολίτευμα, ὃ πάν- 
/ A σ΄ 5 ~ », 7 
των μάλιστα τοὺς “Ἕλληνας ἀσκεῖν ἔδει, κράτιστον 
ἁπάντων πολιτευμάτων ὑπάρχον, ws ἐμὴ δόξα 

/ Δ \ ~ / Ῥ / > " ͵ > 
φέρει, ὃ καὶ τῆς βεβαίου Ρωμαίοις ἐλευθερίας ἦρχε 
καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἀγόντων οὐκ ἐλαχίστην 

~ « 
μοῖραν παρέσχε, τὸ μήτε κατασφάττειν ἡβηδὸν τὰς 
ςε / / / > / \ 
ἁλούσας πολέμῳ πόλεις μήτε ἀνδραποδίζεσθαι μηδὲ 
γῆν αὐτῶν ἀνιέναι μηλόβοτον, ἀλλὰ κληρούχους εἰς 
αὐτὰς ἀποστέλλειν ἐπὶ μέρει τινὶ τῆς χώρας καὶ 

A ~ «ς \ 
ποιεῖν ἀποικίας τῆς “Ῥώμης τὰς κρατηθείσας, ἐνίαις 
δὲ καὶ πολιτείας μεταδιδόναι. ταῦτά τε δὴ καὶ 

> ’ὔ 
τἄλλα τούτοις ὅμοια καταστησάμενος πολιτεύματα 

“ \ 
μεγάλην ἐκ μικρᾶς ἐποίησε τὴν ἀποικίαν, ὡς αὐτὰ 
τὰ ἔργα ἐδήλωσεν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ συνοικίσαντες μετ᾽ 
αὐτοῦ τὴν Ῥώμην οὐ πλείους ἦσαν ἀνδρῶν τρισ- 
χιλίων πεζοὶ καὶ τριακοσίων ἐλάττους ἱππεῖς!" οἱ 

\ / ε > > / a” δὴν > > / 
δὲ καταλειφθέντες ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου, ὅτ᾽ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων 
> / \ \ ¢ “λ \ 7 
ἠφανίσθη, πεζοὶ μὲν ἑξακισχίλιοι πρὸς τέτταρσι 


1 μοῖραν Kiessling: μοίρας Ὁ (3); om. Reudler. 


BOOK II. 15, 4-16, 2 


where it joined the hills,—and made it an asylum 
for suppliants. And building a temple there,— 
but to what god or divinity he dedicated it I cannot 
say for certain,—he engaged, under the colour of 
religion, to protect those who fled to it from suffer- 
ing any harm at the hands of their enemies; and 
if they chose to remain with him, he promised them 
citizenship and a share of the land he should take 
from the enemy. And people came flocking thither 
from all parts, fleeing from their calamities at home ; 
nor had they afterwards any thought of removing 
to any other place, but were held there by daily 
instances of his sociability and kindness. 

XVI. There was yet a third policy of Romulus, 
which the Greeks ought to have practised above all 
others, it being, in my opinion, the best of all 
political measures, as it laid the most solid foundation 
for the liberty of the Romans and was no slight 
factor in raising them to their position of supremacy. 
It was this: not to slay all the men of military age or 
to enslave the rest of the population of the cities 
captured in war or to allow their land to go back 
to pasturage for sheep, but rather to send settlers 
thither to possess some part of the country by lot 
and to make the conquered cities Roman colonies, 
and even to grant citizenship to some of them. By 
these and other like measures he made the colony 
great from a small beginning, as the actual results 
showed; for the number of those who joined with 
him in founding Rome did not amount to more 
than three thousand foot nor quite to three hundred 
horse, whereas he left behind him when he disappeared 
from among men forty-six thousand foot and about 


357 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


᾽ὔ ς - > ᾽ \ > / / 
μυριάσιν, ἱππεῖς δ᾽ οὐ πολὺ ἀπέχοντες χιλίων. 
ἐκείνου δὲ ἄρξαντος τῶν πολιτευμάτων τούτων οἵ 
τε βασιλεῖς οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτὸν ἡγησάμενοι τῆς πόλεως 
τὴν αὐτὴν ἐφύλαξαν προαίρεσιν καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ 
ἐκείνους τὰς ἐνιαυσίους λαμβάνοντες ἀρχὰς, ἔστιν 
ἃ καὶ προστιθέντες, οὕτως ὥστε μηδενὸς ἔθνους τοῦ 
δοκοῦντος εἶναι πολυανθρωποτάτου τὸν “Ῥωμαίων 
γενέσθαι δῆμον ἐλάττονα. 
XVII. Τὰ δὲ “Ελλήνων ἔθη παρὰ ταῦτα ἐξετάζων 
οὐκ ἔχω πῶς ἐπαινέσω τά τε “ακεδαιμονίων καὶ 
\ ~ / \ ~ / > \ , 
τὰ τῶν Θηβαίων καὶ τῶν μέγιστον ἐπὶ σοφίᾳ 
/ > / a / A 2 \ 
φρονούντων ᾿Αθηναίων, ot φυλάττοντες τὸ εὐγενὲς 
καὶ μηδενὶ μεταδιδόντες εἰ μὴ σπανίοις τῆς παρ᾽ 
ἑαυτοῖς πολιτείας (ἐῶ γὰρ λέγειν ὅτι καὶ ξενηλα- 
τοῦντες ἔνιοι) πρὸς τῷ μηδὲν ἀπολαῦσαι ταύτης 
~ > 
τῆς μεγαληγορίας ἀγαθὸν καὶ τὰ μέγιστα δι᾽ αὐτὴν 
» / ~ / / / 
ἐβλάβησαν. Σπαρτιᾶται μέν γε πταίσαντες μάχῃ 
τῇ περὶ Λεῦκτρα, ἐν ἧ χιλίους καὶ ἑπτακοσίους 
»” > 4 > / \ / > / > 
ἄνδρας ἀπέβαλον, οὐκέτι τὴν πόλιν ἠδυνήθησαν ἐκ 
~ ~ / > A > 3 > / 
τῆς συμφορᾶς ταύτης ἀναλαβεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπέστησαν 
τῆς ἡγεμονίας σὺν αἰσχύνῃ. Θηβαῖοι δὲ καὶ 
> = > Gs ik ΄- \ A > /, 
᾿Αθηναῖοι ἐξ ἑνὸς τοῦ περὶ Χαιρώνειαν ἀτυχήματος 
ἅμα τήν τε προστασίαν tis ᾿Ελλάδος καὶ τὴν 
> / \ / Θ \ / > / 
ἐλευθερίαν τὴν πάτριον ὑπὸ Μακεδόνων ἀφῃρέ- 
θησαν. ἡ δὲ “Ῥωμαίων πόλις ἐν ᾿]βηρίᾳ τε καὶ 
> / / » 7 / 
ἰταλίᾳ πολέμους ἔχουσα μεγάλους Σικελίαν τε 
~ \ ~ 
ἀφεστῶσαν ἀνακτωμένη καὶ Σαρδόνα καὶ τῶν ἐν 
/ \ \ \ € / Ud > 
Μακεδονίᾳ καὶ κατὰ τὴν ᾿Ελλάδα πραγμάτων ἐκ- 
> 
πεπολεμωμένων πρὸς αὐτὴν Kat Καρχηδόνος ἐπὶ 
΄- 3 
τὴν ἡγεμονίαν πάλιν ἀνισταμένης καὶ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας 
> / > / s\ 7 a / > \ ‘ 
οὐ μόνον ἀφεστώσης ὀλίγου δεῖν πάσης, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
358 


BOOK II. 16, 3-17, 3 


a thousand horse. Romulus having instituted these 
measures, not alone the kings wha ruled the city 
after him but also the annual magistrates after them 
pursued the same policy, with octasional additions, 
so successfully that the Roman people became 
inferior in numbers to none of the nations that were 
accounted the most populous. 

XVII. When I compare the customs of the Greeks 
with these, I can find no reason to extol] either those 
of the Lacedaemonians or of the Thebans or of the 
Athenians, who pride themselves most on_ their 
wisdom ; all of whom, jealous of their noble birth 
and granting citizenship to none or to very few (I 
say nothing of the fact that some even expelled 
foreigners), not only received no advantage from 
this haughty attitude, but actually suffered the 
greatest harm because of it. Thus, the Spartans 
after their defeat at Leuctra,! where they lost seven- 
teen hundred men, were no longer able to restore 
their city to its former position after that calamity, 
but shamefully abandoned their supremacy. And 
the Thebans and Athenians through the single 
disaster at Chaeronea” were deprived by the Mace- 
donians not only of the leadership of Greece but 
at the same time of the liberty they had inherited 
from their ancestors. But Rome, while engaged 
in great wars both in Spain and Italy and employed 
in recovering Sicily and Sardinia, which had revolted, 
at a time when the situation in Macedonia and Greece 
had become hostile to her and Carthage was again 
contending for the supremacy, and whén all but 
a small portion of Italy was not only in open 


1371 B.c. 2338 B.o. 
359 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


΄ ‘ ? \ ΄ / 
συνεπαγούσης τὸν AviiBraxov κληθέντα πόλεμον, 
τοσούτοις περιπετὴς γενομένη κινδύνοις κατὰ τὸν 
αὐτὸν χρόνον οὐχ ὅπως ἐκακώθη διὰ τὰς τότε 
, > \ ᾿ λ 7 ‘ Oe > ~ Μ 
τύχας, ἀλλὰ καὶ προσέλαβεν ἰσχὺν ἐξ αὐτῶν Ett 
μείζονα τῆς προτέρας, τῷ πλήθει τοῦ στρατιωτικοῦ 
ι “ > ΄ Ἂν > > 
πρὸς ἅπαντα διαρκὴς γενομένη τὰ δεινά, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ 
ὥσπερ ὑπολαμβάνουσί τινες εὐνοίᾳ τύχης χρησα- 
‘ ΄ Ui > 
μένη ἐπεὶ ταύτης ye χάριν ᾧχετ᾽ av ὑποβρύχιος ἐξ 
~ a ~ > A 
ἑνὸς τοῦ περὶ Κάννας πτώματος, ὅτε αὐτῇ ἀπὸ μὲν 
ἑξακισχιλίων ἱππέων ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ τριακόσιοι 
/ > \ 4 / > \ ~ > \ 
περιελείφθησαν, ἀπὸ δὲ μυριάδων ὀκτὼ τῶν εἰς TO 
~ x\ 7 / 
κοινὸν στράτευμα καταγραφεισῶν ὀλίγῳ πλείους 
τρισχιλίων ἐσώθησαν. 
XVIII. Ταῦτά τε δὴ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἄγαμαι καὶ ἔτι 
4 ΄ a ΄ ‘ LA ~ ~ > ~ 
πρὸς τούτοις ἃ μέλλω λέγειν, ὅτι τοῦ καλῶς οἰκεῖ- 
\ ΄ ? / e / a ~ ‘\ 
σθαι tas πόλεις αἰτίας ὑπολαβών, as θρυλοῦσι μὲν 
>? > 
ἅπαντες οἱ πολιτικοί, κατασκευάζουσι δ᾽ ὀλίγοι, 
~ ~ ~ Μ - 
πρῶτον μὲν τὴν παρὰ τῶν θεῶν εὔνοιαν, ἧς παρούσης 
- > / ΄ 
ἅπαντα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἐπὶ τὰ κρείττω συμφέρεται, 
/ \ 
ἔπειτα Tv! σωφροσύνην τε Kai δικαιοσύνην, δι᾿ ἃς 
- / ~ « ~ 
ἧττον ἀλλήλους βλάπτοντες μᾶλλον ὁμονοοῦσι Kai 
΄ > ~ ~ 
τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν οὐ ταῖς αἰσχίσταις μετροῦσιν ἡδοναῖς 
- ~ / \ \ > > 
ἀλλὰ τῷ καλῷ, τελευταίαν δὲ τὴν ἐν τοῖς πολέμοις 
“ 
γενναιότητα τὴν παρασκευάζουσαν εἶναι καὶ τὰς 
~ >) / 
ἄλλας ἀρετὰς τοῖς ἔχουσιν ὠφελίμους, οὐκ ἀπὸ 
/ - ~ 
ταὐτομάτου παραγίνεσθαι τούτων ἕκαστον τῶν 
Ξ oe ‘ey, Δ᾽» PB A aegis = 
ἀγαθῶν ἐνόμισεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἔγνω διότι " νόμοι σπουδαῖοι 
‘ ~ ~ > “ 
καὶ καλῶν ζῆλος ἐπιτηδευμάτων εὐσεβῆ καὶ σώ- 
dQ 7 ~ ΄ 
φρονα καὶ τὰ δίκαια ἀσκοῦσαν καὶ τὰ πολέμια 


360 


BOOK II. 17, 3-18, 2 


rebellion but was also drawing upon her the Hannibalic 
war, as it was called,—though surrounded, I say, by 
so many dangers at one and the same time, Rome was 
so far from being overcome by these misfortunes that 
she derived from them a strength even greater than 
she had had before, being enabled to meet every 
danger, thanks to the number of her soldiers, and 
not, as some imagine, to the favour of Fortune ; since 
for all of Fortune’s assistance the city might have 
been utterly submerged by the single disaster at 
Cannae, where of six thousand horse only three 
hundred and seventy survived, and of eighty thousand 
foot enrolled in the army of the commonwealth 
little more than three thousand escaped. 

XVIII. It is not only these institutions of Romulus 
that I admire, but also those which I am going to 
relate. He understood that the good government of 
cities was due to certain causes which all statesmen 
prate of but few succeed in making effective: first, 
the favour of the gods, the enjoyment of which 
gives success to men’s every enterprise; next, 
moderation and justice, as a result of which the 
citizens, being less disposed to injure one another, are 
more harmonious, and make honour, rather than the 
most shameful pleasures, the measure of their happi- 
ness ; and, lastly, bravery in war, which renders the 
other virtues also useful to their possessors. And 
he thought that none of these advantages is the 
effect of chance, but recognized that good laws and 
the emulation of worthy pursuits render a State 
pious, temperate, devoted to justice, and brave 





1 τὴν Naber: om. O, Jacoby. ἢ διότι B: ὅτι R. 
96] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἀγαθὴν ἐξεργάζονται πόλιν: ὧν πολλὴν ἔσχε πρό- 
νοιαν τὴν ἀρχὴν ποιησάμενος ἀπὸ τῶν περὶ τὰ 
θεῖα καὶ δαιμόνια σεβασμῶν. ἱερὰ μὲν οὖν καὶ 
τεμένη καὶ βωμοὺς καὶ ξοάνων ἱδρύσεις μορφάς τε 
αὐτῶν καὶ σύμβολα καὶ δυνάμεις καὶ δωρεάς, αἷς τὸ 
γένος ἡμῶν εὐηργέτησαν, ἑορτάς τε ὁποίας τινὰς 
ἑκάστῳ θεῶν 7) δαιμόνων ἄγεσθαι προσήκει καὶ 
θυσίας, αἷς χαίρουσι γεραιρόμενοι πρὸς ἀνθρώπων, 
ἐκεχειρίας τε αὖ καὶ πανηγύρεις καὶ πόνων ἀνα- 
παύλας καὶ πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα ὁμοίως κατεστήσατο 
τοῖς κρατίστοις τῶν παρ᾽ “λλησι νομίμων: τοὺς 
δὲ παραδεδομένους περὶ αὐτῶν μύθους, ἐν οἷς 
βλασφημίαι τινὲς ἔνεισι κατ᾽ αὐτῶν ἢ κακηγορίαι,, 
πονηροὺς καὶ ἀνωφελεῖς καὶ ἀσχήμονας ὑπολαβὼν 
εἶναι καὶ οὐχ ὅτι θεῶν ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἀγαθῶν 
ἀξίους, ἅπαντας ἐξέβαλε καὶ παρεσκεύασε τοὺς 
ἀνθρώπους τὰ" κράτιστα περὶ θεῶν λέγειν τε καὶ 
φρονεῖν μηδὲν αὐτοῖς προσάπτοντας ἀνάξιον ἐπιτή- 
δευμα τῆς μακαρίας φύσεως. 

XIX. Οὔτε γὰρ Οὐρανὸς ἐκτεμνόμενος ὑπὸ τῶν 
ἑαυτοῦ παίδων παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις λέγεται οὔτε Κρόνος 
ἀφανίζων τὰς ἑαυτοῦ γονὰς φόβῳ τῆς ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐπι- 
θέσεως οὔτε Ζεὺς καταλύων τὴν Κρόνου δυναστείαν 
καὶ κατακλείων ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ τοῦ Ταρτάρου 
τὸν ἑαυτοῦ πατέρα οὐδέ γε πόλεμοι καὶ τραύματα 
καὶ δεσμοὶ καὶ θητεῖαι θεῶν παρ᾽ ἀνθρώποις - ἑορτή 
τε οὐδεμία παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς μελανείμων ἢ πένθιμος 
ἄγεται τυπετοὺς ἔχουσα καὶ θρήνους γυναικῶν ἐπὶ 
θεοῖς ἀφανιζομένοις, ws παρ᾽ Ἕλλησιν ἐπιτελεῖται 
περί τε Φερσεφόνης ἁρπαγὴν καὶ τὰ Διονύσου πάθη 

1Meineke: κατηγορίαι O. *7a added by Kiessling. 
362 


BOOK ITI. 18, 2-19, 2 


in war. He took great care, therefore, to encourage 
these, beginning with the worship of the gods and 
genii. He established temples, sacred precincts and 
altars, arranged for the setting up of statues, de- 
termined the representations and symbols of the 
gods, and declared their powers, the beneficent 
gifts which they have made to mankind, the par- 
ticular festivals that should be celebrated in honour 
of each god or genius, the sacrifices with which they 
delight to be honoured by men, as well as the holi- 
days, festal assemblies, days of rest, and everything 
alike of that nature, in all of which he followed the 
best customs in use among the Greeks. But he re- 
jected all the traditional myths concerning the gods 
that contain blasphemies or calumnies against them, 
looking upon these as wicked, useless and indecent, 
and unworthy, not only of the gods, but even of 
good men; and he accustomed people both to think 
and to speak the best of the gods and to attribute 
to them no conduct unworthy of their blessed nature. 

XIX. Indeed, there is no tradition among the 
Romans either of Caelus being castrated by his 
own sons or of Saturn destroying his own offspring 
to secure himself from their attempts or of Jupiter 
dethroning Saturn and confining his own father in 
the dungeon of Tartarus, or, indeed, of wars, wounds, 
or bonds of the gods, or of their servitude among 
men. And no festival is observed among them as 
a day of mourning or by the wearing of black gar- 
ments and the beating of breasts and the lamenta- 
tions of women because of the disappearance of 
deities, such as the Greeks perform in commemorat- 
ing the rape of Persephoné and the adventures of 


363 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Pe Μ ~ ~ 
καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα τοιαῦτα: οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἴδοι τις παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς, 
/ ΄ ” ~ ~ 
καίτοι διεφθαρμένων ἤδη τῶν ἐθῶν, od θεοφορήσεις, 
» / 
οὐ κορυβαντιασμούς, οὐκ ἀγυρμούς, οὐ βακχείας Kal 
\ > / ~ 
τελετὰς ἀπορρήτους, οὐ διαπαννυχισμοὺς ἐν ἱεροῖς 
9 - \ ~ 
ἀνδρῶν σὺν γυναιξίν, οὐκ ἄλλο τῶν παραπλησίων 
/ / > / > > 93 ~ “ 
τούτοις τερατευμάτων οὐδέν, ἀλλ᾽ εὐλαβῶς ἅπαντα 
πραττόμενά τε καὶ λεγόμενα τὰ περὶ τοὺς θεούς, ὡς 
Ψ 3 “ Μ \ / A Δ 
οὔτε παρ᾽ Ἕλλησιν οὔτε παρὰ βαρβάροις: καὶ ὃ 
πάντων μάλιστα ἔγωγε τεθαύμακα, καίπερ μυρίων 
5 ~ 2 
ὅσων εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἐληλυθότων ἐθνῶν, οἷς πολλὴ 
ἀνάγκη σέβειν τοὺς πατρίους θεοὺς τοῖς οἴκοθεν 
/ > \ > ~ > / ~ ~ 
νομίμοις, οὐδενὸς εἰς ζῆλον ἐλήλυθε τῶν ξενικῶν 
> / ε / / “a - a” 
ἐπιτηδευμάτων ἡ πόλις δημοσίᾳ, ὃ πολλαῖς ἤδη 
συνέβη παθεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ εἴ τινα κατὰ χρησμοὺς 
ε ~ ~ ~ 
ἐπεισηγάγετο ἱερά, τοῖς ἑαυτῆς αὐτὰ τιμᾷ νομίμοις 
- / 
ἅπασαν ἐκβαλοῦσα τερθρείαν μυθικήν, ὥσπερ τὰ 
~ ~ ¢ ~ 
τῆς ᾿Ιδαίας θεᾶς ἱερά. θυσίας μὲν yap αὐτῇ Kat 
~ ~ ¢ 
ἀγῶνας ἄγουσιν ava πᾶν ἔτος οἱ στρατηγοὶ κατὰ 
\ « / / ¢ ~ \ δ A ΨΡ \ 
τοὺς Ῥωμαίων νόμους, ἱερᾶται δὲ αὐτῆς ἀνὴρ Φρὺξ 
\ / Wate: \ 
καὶ γυνὴ Φρυγία καὶ περιάγουσιν ava τὴν πόλιν 





1: ΤῊ. Bacchic rites, introduced into Rome shortly after 
the close of the Second Punic War, were soon being cele- 
brated with such licentious excesses and were accom- 
panied by the plotting of so many crimes that the most 
drastic action was taken by the senate and consuls in 186 
to punish the guilty and prevent all further celebration of 
the rites. An abstract of the decree passed by the senate 
(the Senatus Consultum de Bacchanalibus), contained in an 
official letter of the consuls to some local magistrates in 
southern Italy, is still preserved on a bronze tablet and is 
one of our earliest Latin documents. It appears in the 


364 


BOOK II. 19, 24 


Dionysus and all the other things of like nature. 
And one will see among them, even though their 
manners are now corrupted, no ecstatic transports, 
no Corybantic frenzies, no begging under the colour 
of religion, no bacchanals! or secret mysteries, no 
all-night vigils of men and women together in the 
temples, nor any other mummery of this kind; but 
alike in all their words and actions with respect to 
the gods a reverence is shown such as is seen among 
neither Greeks nor barbarians. And,—the thing 
which I myself have marvelled at most,—notwith- 
standing the influx into Rome of innumerable 
nations which are under every necessity of worship- 
ping their ancestral gods according to the customs 
of their respective countries, yet the city has never 
officially adopted any of those foreign practices, as 
has been the experience of many cities in the past ; 
but, even though she has, in pursuance of oracles, 
introduced certain rites from abroad, she celebrates 
them in accordance with her own traditions, after 
banishing all fabulous clap-trap. The rites of the 
Idaean goddess are a case in point ; for the praetors 
perform sacrifices and celebrate games in her honour 
every year according to the Roman customs, but the 
priest and priestess of the goddess are Phrygians, and 
it is they who carry her image in procession through 
Corpus Inscript. Lat. i. 196 and x. 104, also in F. D. 
Allen’s Remnants of Early Latin, pp. 28-31. 

2 The official] title of Cybelé in Rome was Mater Deum 
Magna Idaea, commonly shortened to Maier Magna or 
Mater Idaea. The sacred black stone, which was her 
symbol, was brought from Pessinus in Asia Minor in 204 
B.C., in response to a Sibylline oracle which declared that 


only thus could Hannibal be driven out of Italy. The 
games established in her honour were the Megalesia. 


365 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


οὗτοι μητραγυρτοῦντες, ὥσπερ αὐτοῖς ἔθος, τύπους 
τε περικείμενοι τοῖς στήθεσι καὶ καταυλούμενοι 
\ ~ ~ 
πρὸς τῶν ἑπομένων τὰ μητρῷα μέλη Kal τύμπανα 
κροτοῦντες: “Ῥωμαίων δὲ τῶν αὐθιγενῶν οὔτε 
μητραγυρτῶν τις οὔτε καταυλούμενος πορεύεται 
\ ~ 
διὰ τῆς πόλεως ποικίλην ἐνδεδυκὼς στολὴν οὔτε 
opytaler! τὴν θεὸν τοῖς Φρυγίοις ὀργιασμοῖς κατὰ 
νόμον καὶ ψήφισμα βουλῆς. οὕτως εὐλαβῶς ἡ 
πόλις ἔχει πρὸς τὰ οὐκ ἐπιχώρια ἔθη περὶ θεῶν καὶ 
πάντα ὀττεύεται τῦφον, ᾧ μὴ πρόσεστι τὸ εὐπρεπές. 
XX. Kai μηδεὶς ὑπολάβῃ με ἀγνοεῖν ὅτι τῶν 
“Ελληνικῶν μύθων εἰσί τινες ἀνθρώποις χρήσιμοι, 
ς A > ὃ / \ ~ / A ὃ a 
οἱ μὲν ἐπιδεικνύμενοι τὰ τῆς φύσεως ἔργα dv ἀλλη- 
γορίας, ot δὲ παραμυθίας ἕνεκα συγκείμενοι τῶν 
ἀνθρωπείων συμφορῶν, οἱ δὲ ταραχὰς ἐξαιρούμενοι 
~ / 
ψυχῆς καὶ δείματα καὶ δόξας καθαίροντες ἃ ody 
ὁγιεῖ . δ᾽ ἀλλ IS ἕν λασθέ 
ὑγιεῖς, οἵ ἧς τινὸς ἕνεκα συμπλασθέντες 
>] / Ἰλλὰ / > / ~ 5) A 
ὠφελείας. ἀλλὰ καίπερ ἐπιστάμενος ταῦτα οὐδενὸς 
χεῖρον ὅμως εὐλαβῶς διάκειμαι πρὸς αὐτοὺς καὶ 
τὴν Ῥωμαίων μᾶλλον ἀποδέχομαι θεολογίαν, ἐν- 
7 tA A \ ᾿] ~ “EA ~ 0 
θυμούμενος ὅτι τὰ μὲν EK τῶν ηνικῶν μύθων 
5 A / / > \ > AA a ὃ rd 
ἀγαθὰ μικρά τέ ἐστι Kat οὐ πολλοὺς δυνάμενα 
> = > \ , \ 2 , a ¢ 
ὠφελεῖν, ἀλλὰ μόνους τοὺς ἐξητακότας ὧν ἕνεκα 
ς / 
γίνεται, σπάνιοι δ᾽ εἰσὶν οἱ μετειληφότες ταύτης 
τῆς φιλοσοφίας. ὁ δὲ πολὺς καὶ ἀφιλοσόφητος 


1Ambrosch: ὀργιάζειν O. 
2 καὶ Kiessling: 7 O. 
8 καθαίροντες A: καθαιροῦντες R, Jacoby. 


366 


BOOK IT. 19, 4-20, 2 


the city, begging alms in her name according to their 
custom, and wearing figures upon their breasts ! and 
striking their timbrels while their followers play 
tunes upon their flutes in honour of the Mother 
of the Gods. But by a law and decree of the senate 
no native Roman walks in procession through the 
city arrayed in a parti-coloured robe, begging alms 
or escorted by flute-players, or worships the goddess 
with the Phrygian ceremonies. So cautious are 
they about admitting any foreign religious customs 
and so great is their aversion to all pompous display 
that is wanting in decorum. 

ΧΧ Let no one imagine, however, that I am not 
sensible that some of the Greek myths are useful to 
mankind, part of them explaining, as they do, the 
works of Nature by allegories, others being designed 
as a consolation for human misfortunes, some freeing 
the mind of its agitations and terrors and clearing 
away unsound opinions, and others invented for 
some other useful purpose. But, though I am 
as well acquainted as anyone with these matters, 
nevertheless my attitude toward the myths is one 
of caution, and I am more inclined to accept the 
theology of the Romans, when I consider that the 
advantages from the Greek myths are slight and 
cannot be of profit to many, but only to those who 
have examined the end for which they are designed ; 
and this philosophic attitude is shared by few. 
The great multitude, unacquainted with philosophy, 


1 Polybius twice (xxi. 6, 7; 37, 5) refers to the “ figures 
and pectorals’’ of the Galli, the priests of Cybelé; but 
we have no further information regarding them. 


367 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ΝΜ pee. \ / / - \ \ > aA 
ὄχλος ἐπὶ TA χείρω λαμβάνειν φιλεῖ τοὺς περὶ αὐτῶν 
λόγους καὶ δυεῖν πάσχει θάτερον, ἢ καταφρονεῖ τῶν 

~ ¢ > ~ £ ΄. A 
θεῶν ws ev πολλῇ κακοδαιμονίᾳ κυλινδουμένων, ἢ 

~ ? / \ / A 
τῶν αἰσχίστων τε καὶ παρανομωτάτων οὐδενὸς 
ἀπέχεται θεοῖς αὐτὰ προσκείμενα ὁρῶν. 

XXI. AN’ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων τοῖς αὐτὸ μόνον τὸ 
θεωρητικὸν τῆς φιλοσοφίας μέρος ἀποτετμημένοις 
3 / - ~ > ia 2 Are 4 / 
ἀφείσθω σκοπεῖν, τῆς δ᾽ ὑπὸ “Ῥωμύλου κατασταθεί- 

/ \ / ¢ / ς , ΝΜ 
ons πολιτείας καὶ τάδε ἡγησάμην ἱστορίας ἀξια. 
πρῶτον μέν, ὅτι πολλοῖς σώμασιν ἀπέδωκε θερα- 

/ \ / > ~ Μ / / 
mevew τὸ δαιμόνιον. ἐν γοῦν ἄλλῃ πόλει νεοκτίστῳ 
τοσούτους ἱερεῖς τε καὶ θεραπευτὰς θεῶν εὐθὺς ἀπο- 
δειχθέντας, οὐδεὶς ἂν εἰπεῖν ἔχοι. χωρὶς γὰρ τῶν 

7 ¢ 
ἐχόντων Tas συγγενικὰς ἱερωσύνας οἱ τὰ κοινὰ περὶ 
τῆς πόλεως ἱερὰ συντελοῦντες κατὰ φυλάς τε καὶ 
? ~ 
dpatpas ἑξήκοντα κατεστάθησαν ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκείνου 
3 ~ / ae Υ͂ O Ψ i > > 
ἀρχῆς λέγω δὲ ἃ Τερέντιος Οὐάρρων ἐν ἀρχαιολο- 
γίαις γέγραφεν, ἀνὴρ τῶν κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν ἡλικίαν 
id ~ 
ἀκμασάντων πολυπειρότατος. ἔπειτα, ὅτι τῶν 
> e >? 
ἄλλων φαύλως πως καὶ ἀπερισκέπτως ws ἐπὶ τὸ" 
- > 
πολὺ ποιουμένων τὰς αἱρέσεις τῶν ἐπιστησομένων 
“ A ΄σ / \ / > / 
τοῖς ἱεροῖς Kal τῶν μὲν ἀργυρίου τὸ τίμιον ἀξιούν- 
~ / / > Aa 
των ἀποκηρύττειν, τῶν δὲ κλήρῳ διαιρούντων," ἐκεῖ- 
> / \ ς ͵7ὔ 
νος οὔτε ὠνητὰς χρημάτων ἐποίησε τὰς ἱερωσύνας 
» / / Ἰλλ᾽ > ς / / 
οὔτε κλήρῳ μεριστάς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἑκάστης φράτρας 
\ 
ἐνομοθέτησεν ἀποδείκνυσθαι δύο τοὺς ὑπὲρ πεντή- 
» ΄“ 
κοντα ἔτη γεγονότας γένει τε προὔχοντας τῶν 


1 τὸ added by Kiessling. 


2 διαιρούντων B: διαιρούντων τοὺς ἱερεῖς R. 


368 


BOOK II. 20, 2-21, 3 


are prone to take these stories about the gods in the 
worse sense and to fall into one of two errors: they 
either despise the gods as buffeted by many mis- 
fortunes, or else refrain from none of the most 
shameful and lawless deeds when they see them 
attributed to the gods. 

XXI. But let the consideration of these matters 
be left to those who have set aside the theoretical 
part of philosophy exclusively for their contempla- 
tion. To return to the government established by 
Romulus, I have thought the following things also 
worthy the notice of history. In the first place, he 
appointed a great number of persons to carry on the 
worship of the gods. At any rate, no one could 
name any other newly-founded city in which so 
many priests and ministers of the gods were 
appointed from the beginning. For, apart from 
those who held family priesthoods, sixty were 
appointed in his reign to perform by tribes and 
curiae the public sacrifices on behaif of the common- 
wealth; I am merely repeating what Terentius 
Varro, the most learned man of his age, has written in 
his Antiquities. In the next place, whereas others 
generally choose in a careless and inconsiderate 
manner those who are to preside over religious 
matters, some thinking fit to make public sale of 
this honour and others disposing of it by lot, he 
would not allow the priesthoods to be either pur- 
chased for money or assigned by lot, but made a 
law that each curia should choose two men over 
fifty years of age, of distinguished birth and 





5 γένει Kiessling: τοὺς γένει O, Jacoby. 


369 
VOL. I. O 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἄλλων καὶ ἀρετῇ διαφόρους καὶ χρημάτων περιουσίαν 
ἔχοντας ἀρκοῦσαν καὶ μηδὲν ἠλαττωμένους τῶν περὶ 
τὸ σῶμα- τούτους δὲ οὐκ εἰς ὡρισμένον τινὰ χρόνον 
τὰς τιμὰς ἔταξεν ἔχειν, ἀλλὰ διὰ παντὸς τοῦ βίου, 
στρατειῶν μὲν ἀπολελυμένους διὰ τὴν ἡλικίαν, τῶν 
δὲ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ὀχληρῶν διὰ τὸν νόμον. 
XXII. ᾿Επεὶ δὲ καὶ διὰ γυναικῶν ἔδει τινὰ ἱερὰ 
συντελεῖσθαι καὶ διὰ παίδων ἀμφιθαλῶν ἕτερα, ἵνα 
καὶ ταῦτα γένηται κατὰ τὸ κράτιστον, τάς τε 
γυναῖκας ἔταξε τῶν ἱερέων τοῖς ἑαυτῶν ἀνδράσι 
συνιερᾶσθαι, καὶ εἴ τι μὴ θέμις ἦν ὑπ᾽ ἀνδρῶν 
ὀργιάζεσθαι κατὰ νόμον τὸν ἐπιχώριον, ταύτας ἐπι- 
τελεῖν καὶ παῖδας αὐτῶν τὰ καθήκοντα λειτουργεῖν" 
τοῖς δὲ ἄπαισιν ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων οἴκων τοὺς χαριεστά- 
τοὺς καταλεγέντας ἐξ ἑκάστης Τραξραςς κόρον καὶ 
κόρην, τὸν μὲν ἕως ἥβης ὑ ὑπηρετεῖν ἐπὶ" τοῖς ἱεροῖς, 
τὴν δὲ κόρην ὅσον ἂν ἢ χρόνον ἁγνὴ γάμων" ἐκ 
τῶν ᾿Ελληνικῶν νόμων καὶ ταῦτα μετενεγκάμενος, 
ὡς ἐγὼ πείθομαι. ὅσα μὲν γὰρ αἱ κανηφόροι 
καὶ ἀρρηφόροι3 λεγόμεναι λειτουργοῦσιν ἐπὶ τῶν 
λληνικῶν ἱερῶν, ταῦτα παρὰ “Ρωμαίοις at προσ- 
αγορευόμεναι τουτολᾶται ὃ συντελοῦσι στεφάναις 
1. ἐπὶ A: om. B. 2 ἀρρηφόροι ABa: ἀρρητοφόροι Ba. 


3 τρουτολᾶται Kiessling, τουτόλαι Kostlin: τοῦτο de. . . 
τοῦτο δὲ B. 


1 Patrimi matrimique. This requirement, very familiar 
in Roman ritual, would not appear to have been so common 
among the Greeks. Allusions to such a παῖς ἀμφιθαλής are 
extremely rare, and then only in connexion with festivals 
or, in one instance, a wedding. 


370 


BOOK II. 21, 3-22, 2 


exceptional merit, of competent fortune, and with- 
out any bodily defects; and he ordered that these 
should enjoy their honours, not for any fixed period, 
but for life, freed from military service by their age 
and from civil burdens by the law. 

XXII. And because some rites were to be per- 
formed by women, others by children whose fathers 
and mothers were living,! to the end that these also 
might be administered in the best manner, he ordered 
that the wives of the priests should be associated with 
their husbands in the priesthood; and that in the 
ease of any rites which men were forbidden by the 
law of the country to celebrate, their wives should 
perform them and their children should assist as 
their duties required ; and that the priests who had 
no children should choose out of the other families 
of each curia the most beautiful boy and girl, the 
boy to assist in the rites till the age of manhood, 
and the girl so long as she remained unmarried. 
These arrangements also he borrowed, in my opinion, 
from the practices of the Greeks. For all the duties 
that are performed in the Greek ceremonies by the 
maidens whom they call kanéphoroi and arrhéphoroi 3 
are performed by those whom the Romans call 
tutulatae,?> who wear on their heads the same kind of 


2The “basket-bearers’? and the “bearers of the 
symbols (?)’’ of Athena Polias. But there is great dispute as 
regards both the spelling and the meaning of thesecond word. 
’Tutulatae is due to Kiessling’s conjecture. The 
feminine form does not occur elsewhere, but the masculine 
tutulati is attested by a gloss in Festus (pp. 354 f.). The 
word was descriptive of those who wore their hair plaited 
up in the shape of a cone (tutulus). This was an ancient 
style of arranging the hair, and was prescribed in the case 

of the flaminica Dialis. 
37] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Koopovpevat τὰς κεφαλάς, οἵαις κοσμεῖται τὰ 
τῆς ᾿Εφεσίας ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἀφιδρύματα παρ᾽ “Ελλησιν. 
ὅσα δὲ παρὰ Τυρρηνοῖς καὶ ἔτι πρότερον παρὰ 
IleXacyots ἐτέλουν ἐπί τε Κουρήτων καὶ μεγάλων 
θεῶν ὀργιασμοῖς οἱ καλούμενοι πρὸς αὐτῶν κά- 
ὃμιλοι, ταῦτα κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον ὑπηρέτουν 3 
τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν οἱ λεγόμενοι νῦν ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων κά- 
μίλοι. ἔτι πρὸς τούτοις ἔταξε μάντιν ἐξ ἑκάστης 
φυλῆς ἕνα παρεῖναι τοῖς ἱεροῖς, ὃν ἡμεῖς μὲν 
ἱεροσκόπον καλοῦμεν, “Ῥωμαῖοι δὲ ὀλίγον τι τῆς 
ἀρχαίας φυλάττοντες ὀνομασίας ἀρούσπικα 3 προσ- 
ayopevovow. ἅπαντας δὲ τοὺς ἱερεῖς τε καὶ 
λειτουργοὺς τῶν θεῶν ἐνομοθέτησεν ἀποδείκνυσθαι 
μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν φρατρῶν, ἐπικυροῦσθαι δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν 
ἐξηγουμένων τὰ θεῖα διὰ μαντικῆς. 

XXIII. Ταῦτα περὶ τῶν θρησκευόντων τοὺς 
θεοὺς καταστησάμενος διήρει πάλιν, ὡς ἔφην, 
κατ᾽ ἐπιτηδειότητα ταῖς φράτραις τὰ ἱερά, θεοὺς 
ἀποδεικνὺς ἑκάστοις καὶ δαίμονας, οὗς ἔμελλον 
ἀεὶ σέβειν, καὶ τὰς εἰς τὰ ἱερὰ δαπάνας ἔταξεν, ἃς 
ἐχρῆν αὐτοῖς ἐκ τοῦ δημοσίου δίδοσθαι. συνέθυόν 
τε τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν οἵ φρατριεῖς * τὰς ἀπομερισθείσας 

1G. Voss: κάδωλοι Ο. ὃ ὑπηρετοῦσι Reiske. 


8. Lange emended to αὔσπικα. 
4 of φρατριεῖς Kiessling: ai dparpa ets O. 





1 Cadmili is another form resting on conjecture. Else- 
where the word occurs only in the singular, as a proper 
name. Cadmilus (sometimes written Casmilus) was one 
of the Cabeiri worshipped in Samothrace and was identified 
with Hermes. The name was probably of Oriental origin. 


372 


BOOK II. 22, 2-23, 2 


crowns with which the statues of the Ephesian 
Artemis are adorned among the Greeks. And all the 
functions which among the Tyrrhenians and still 
earlier among the Pelasgians were performed by 
those they called cadmili' in the rites of the Curetes 
and in those of the Great Gods, were performed in the 
same manner by those attendants of the priests who 
are now called by the Romans camilli.2. Further- 
more, Romulus ordered one soothsayer out of each 
tribe to be present at the sacrifices. This soothsayer 
we call hieroskopos or “‘ inspector of the vitals,” and 
the Romans, preserving something of the ancient 
name, aruspex.2 He also made a law that all the 
priests and ministers of the gods should be chosen 
by the curiae and that their election should be con- 
firmed by those who interpret the will of the gods 
by the art of divination. 

XXIII. After he had made these regulations 
concerning the ministers of the gods, he again, as 
I have stated,’ assigned the sacrifices in an appro- 

riate manner to the various curiae, appointing for 
each of them gods and genii whom they were always 
to worship, and determined the expenditures for the 
sacrifices, which were to be paid to them out of the 
public treasury. The members of each curia performed 
their appointed sacrifices together with their own 

2 The camilli were free-born youths who assisted in the 
sacrifices of the famen Dialis ; in time, however, the term 
came to be applied to those assisting in other religious 
rites. The word was probably introduced from Etruria. 


Varro connected it with Casmilus (or Cadmilus), but most 
scholars to-day reject this derivation. 


3. Aruspex or, more properly, haruspex, meant “‘ inspector 


of the entrails’’; but the element haru- is not, as 
Dionysius supposed, a corruption of hiero-, 
* Chap. 21, 2-3. 


373 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


αὐτοῖς θυσίας καὶ συνειστιῶντο κατὰ Tas ἕορτὰς 
ἐπὶ τῆς φρατριακῆς ἑστίας: ἑστιατόριον yap ἣν 
κατεσκευασμένον ἑκάστῃ φράτρᾳ καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ 
καθωσίωτό τις, ὥσπερ ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ελληνικοῖς πρυ- 
τανείοις, ἑστία κοινὴ τῶν φρατριέων.: ὄνομα δὲ 
καὶ τοῖς ἑστιατορίοις ἦν, ὅπερ ταῖς φράτραις, 
κουρίαι, καὶ μέχρις ἡμῶν οὕτω καλοῦνται. τοῦτο 
τὸ πολίτευμα δοκεῖ μοι λαβεῖν ἐκ πῆς Δακεδαι- 
μονίων ἀγωγῆς τῆς περὶ τὰ φιδίτια * κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνον 
τὸν χρόνον ἐπιχωριαζούσης, ἣν Λυκοῦργος εἰση- 
γήσασθαι δοκεῖ παρὰ ἀρητῶν μαθών, καὶ μεγάλα 
τὴν πόλιν ὠφελῆσαι ἐν εἰρήνῃ μὲν εἰς εὐτέλειαν 
ἀγαγὼν τοὺς βίους καὶ σωφροσύνην τῆς Kal? 
ἡμέραν διαίτης, ἐν πολέμῳ δ᾽ εἰς αἰδῶ καὶ πρόνοιαν 
καταστήσας ἕκαστον τοῦ μὴ καταλιπεῖν τὸν παρα- 
στάτην, ᾧ καὶ συνέσπεισε καὶ συνέθυσε καὶ κοινῶν 
ἱερῶν μετέσχεν. καὶ οὐ μόνον τῆς περὶ ταῦτα 
σοφίας χάριν ἄξιος ἐπαινεῖσθαι ὃ ἀνήρ, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
τῆς εὐτελείας τῶν θυσιῶν, αἷς γεραίρεσθαι τοὺς 
θεοὺς ἐνομοθέτησεν, ὧν αἱ πλεῖσται διέμενον ἕως 
τῆς καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἡλικίας, εἰ μὴ καὶ πᾶσαι, κατὰ 
τὸν ἀρχαῖον ἐπιτελούμεναι τρόπον. ἐγὼ γοῦν 
ἐθεασάμην ἐν ἱεραῖς οἰκίαις δεῖπνα προκείμενα 
θεοῖς ἐπὶ τραπέζαις ξυλίναις ἀρχαϊκαῖς ἐν κάνησι 
καὶ πινακίσκοις κεραμεοῖς, ἀλφίτων μάζας καὶ 
πόπανα καὶ ζέας καὶ καρπῶν τινων ἀπαρχὰς καὶ 
ἄλλα τοιαῦτα λιτὰ καὶ εὐδάπανα καὶ πάσης ἀπειρο- 
καλίας ἀπηλλαγμένα: καὶ σπονδὰς εἶδον ἐγκεκρα- 
‘Grimm : φρατριῶν O, Jacoby. 


2Gelenius: φιλίτια O. 
3 Biicheler: ἄγων B, Jacoby, ἀνάγων R. 


374 


BOOK II. 23, 2-5 


priests, and on holy days they feasted together at 
their common table. For a banqueting-hall had 
been built for each curia, and in it there was conse- 
crated, just as in the Greek prytanea, a common 
table for all the members of the curia. These 
banqueting-halls had the same name as the curiae 
themselves, and are called so to our day. This 
institution, it seems to me, Romulus took over from 
the practice of the Lacedaemonians in the case of 
their phiditia.) which were then the vogue. It 
would seem that Lycurgus, who had learned the 
institution from the Cretans, introduced it at Sparta 
to the great advantage of his country ; for he thereby 
in time of peace directed the citizens’ lives toward 
frugality and temperance in their daily repasts, and in 
time of war inspired every man with a sense of shame 
and concern not to forsake his comrade with whom 
he had offered libations and sacrifices and shared 
in common rites. And not alone for his wisdom 
in these matters does Romulus deserve praise, but 
also for the frugality of the sacrifices that he 
appointed for the honouring of the gods, the greatest 
part of which, if not all, remained to my day, being 
still performed in the ancient manner. At any rate, 
I myself have seen in the sacred edifices repasts 
set before the gods upon ancient wooden tables, 
in baskets and small earthen plates, consisting of 
barley bread, cakes and spelt, with the first-offerings 
of some fruits, and other things of like nature, simple, 
cheap, and devoid of all vulgar display. I have 
seen also the libation wines that had been mixed, 


1 The Spartan name for συσσίτια, the public messes. 


379 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


͵ ΕῚ > > - \ - ΝΜ > > 
μένας οὐκ ἐν ἀργυροῖς καὶ χρυσοῖς ayyeow, ἀλλ 
ἐν ὀστρακίναις κυλίσκαις ῖ καὶ πρόχοις, καὶ πάνυ 
ἠγάσθην τῶν ἀνδρῶν ὅτι διαμένουσιν ἐν τοῖς 
/ ” > \ > / ~ > / 
πατρίοις ἔθεσιν οὐδὲν ἐξαλλάττοντες τῶν ἀρχαίων 
ἱερῶν εἰς τὴν ἀλαζόνα πολυτέλειαν. ἔστι μὲν οὖν 
ς 
ἃ καὶ Νόμας Π͵|ομπίλιος ὁ μετὰ Ῥωμύλον ἄρξας 
΄- 7 
τῆς πόλεως κατεστήσατο μνήμης ἄξια καὶ λόγου, 
> ΄ 
περιττὸς τὴν γνώμην ἀνὴρ καὶ τὰ θεῖα ἐξηγήσασθαι 
\ > \/ Sek τ “ oe \ / 
σοφὸς ἐν ὀλίγοις, ὑπὲρ ὧν ὕστερον ἐρῶ, καὶ Τύλλος 
¢ / e / 3 \ Ῥ / / \ 
Οστίλιος 6 τρίτος ἀπὸ “Ῥωμύλου βασιλεύσας Kai 
, < > > “- / ~ > > ¢ 
πάντες οἱ μετ᾽ ἐκεῖνον γενόμενοι βασιλεῖς - ἀλλ᾽ ὁ 
τὰ σπέρματα καὶ τὰς ἀρχὰς αὐτοῖς παρασχὼν καὶ 
τὰ κυριώτατα καταστησάμενος τῶν περὶ τὰ θεῖα 
« ἐς 
νομίμων “Ῥωμύλος ἦν. 
XXIV. 4οκεῖ δὲ καὶ τῆς ἄλλης εὐκοσμίας, ἧ 
4 Ῥ - ὃ 5A 50 ~ \ 
χρώμενοι “Ῥωμαῖοι διεφύλαξαν εὐδαιμονοῦσαν τὴν 
πόλιν ἐπὶ πολλὰς γενεάς, ἐκεῖνος ἄρξαι νόμους κα- 
λοὺς καὶ συμφέροντας, ἀγράφους μὲν τοὺς πλείστους, 
ἔστι δ᾽ οὗς καὶ ἐν γράμμασι κειμένους καταστησά- 
μενος, ὧν ἐγὼ τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους οὐδὲν δέομαι γρά- 
dew, ots δὲ πάντων μάλιστα τεθαύμακα καὶ ἐξ 
τ ε / A \ \ ty! es \ 
ὧν ὑπείληφα καταφανῆ καὶ τὴν ἄλλην τοῦ ἀνδρὸς 
γενήσεσθαι νομοθεσίαν, ὡς αὐστηρὰ καὶ μισοπόνηρος 
> \ \ ς 
ἦν καὶ πολλὴν ἔχουσα πρὸς τοὺς ἡρωικοὺς βίους 
- ue / ~ ~ 
ὁμοιότητα, du’ ὀλίγης ὑπομνήσεως σημανῶ, τοσοῦτο 
~ / 
προειπών, OTL μοι δοκοῦσιν ἅπαντες οἱ διατάξαντες 
A \ « 
τάς τε βαρβαρικὰς καὶ τὰς ᾿λληνικὰς πολιτείας τὸ 
A ‘ > ~ ID OA Ὁ / iA > νὸς 
μὲν κοινὸν ὀρθῶς ἰδεῖν, ὅτι πόλιν ἅπασαν ἐκ πολλῶν 


1 κυλίσκαις Β (but corrected to κύλιξι) : κυλικίσκαις A, 


376 


BOOK II. 23, 5-24, 2 


not in silver and gold vessels, but in little earthen 
cups and jugs, and I have greatly admired these men 
for adhering to the customs of their ancestors and 
not degenerating from their ancient rites into a 
boastful magnificence. ‘There are, it is true, other 
institutions, worthy to be both remembered and 
related, which were established by Numa Pompilius, 
who ruled the city after Romulus, a man of con- 
summate wisdom and of rare sagacity in interpreting 
the will of the gods, and of them I shall speak later ; 
and yet others were added by Tullus Hostilius, the 
second! king after Romulus, and by all the kings 
who followed him. But the seeds of them were 
sown and the foundations laid by Romulus, who 
established the principal rites of their religion. 
XXIV. Romulus also seems to have been the 
author of that good discipline in other matters by 
the observance of which the Romans have kept their 
commonwealth flourishing for many generations ; 
for he established many good and useful laws, the 
greater part of them unwritten, but some committed 
to writing. There is no need for me to mention most 
of them, but 1 will give a short account of those 
which I have admired most of all and which I have 
regarded as suitable to illustrate the character of 
the rest of this man’s legislation, showing how aus- 
tere it was, how averse to vice, and how closely it 
resembled the life of the heroic age. However, 
I will first observe that all who have established 
constitutions, barbarian as well as Greek, seem to 
me to have recegnized correctly the general prin- 
ciple that every State, since it consists of many 


1 Literally, the “‘ third,” counting inclusively. 


377 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


” ~ > θ / 1 λ “ > \ -“ ¢ 
οἴκων συνεστῶσαν ὀρθήν te! πλεῖν εἰκὸς ὅταν ot 
~ > ~ ~ ~ 
τῶν ἰδιωτῶν εὐσταθῶσι βίοι, καὶ χειμῶνα πολὺν 
ἄγειν ὅταν κακῶς ἑκάστοις ἔχῃ τὰ ἴδια, καὶ ὅτι δεῖ 
~ > 
τὸν νοῦν ἔχοντα πολιτικόν, ἐάν τε νομοθέτης ἐάν τε 
A Ss ~ ~ / / 
βασιλεὺς ἦ, ταῦτα νομοθετεῖν, ἃ ποιήσει δικαίους 
\ 4 \ ~ 2 - / > e > 
Kal σώφρονας τοὺς τῶν ἰδιωτῶν βίους. ἐξ ὧν ὃ 
> ~ 
av ἐπιτηδευμάτων καὶ Ov οἵων γένοιντο τοιοῦτοι 
νόμων, οὐκέθ᾽ ὁμοίως ἅπαντες δοκοῦσί μοι συνιδεῖν, 
> > ” / ~ ~ ~ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔνιοί ye πολλοῦ Kai τοῦ παντός, ws εἰπεῖν, 
> - ~ 
ἐν τοῖς κυριωτάτοις καὶ πρώτοις μέρεσι τῆς νο- 
~ \ ~ 
μοθεσίας ἁμαρτεῖν. αὐτίκα περὶ γάμων Kal τῆς 
~ = ~ A 
πρὸς γυναῖκας ὁμιλίας, ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἄρχεσθαι δεῖ τὸν 
\ / 
νομοθέτην, ὥσπερ Kal ἡ φύσις ἁρμόττειν τοὺς βίους 
e ~ ες ~ / 
ἡμῶν ἠρξατο, οἱ μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν θηρίων TO παράδειγμα 
> , 
λαβόντες ἀφέτους Kai κοινὰς Tas μίξεις ἐποίησαν 3 
~ \ ~ b] ~ ” 
τῷ ἄρρενι πρὸς τὸ θῆλυ, ὡς ἐρωτικῶν τε οἴστρων 
\ > / 
ἐλευθερώσοντες τοὺς βίους Kat ζήλων ἀλληλοκτόνων 
ἐξελούμενοι καὶ πολλῶν ἄλλων ἀπαλλάξοντες κακῶν, 
Δ / 4, 2907 ” 4 \ / 
ἃ καταλαμβάνει τούς τε ἰδίους οἴκους Kal τὰς πόλεις 
ev A - [ \ 7 \ > / > 
ὅλας διὰ γυναῖκας ot δὲ ταύτας μὲν ἐξήλασαν ἐκ 
΄σ \ / 
τῶν πόλεων Tas ἀγερώχους καὶ θηριώδεις συνουσίας 
- / \ \ 
ἄνδρα συναρμόσαντες εἰς ὃ γυναῖκα μίαν, περὶ δὲ 
~ / ~ 
φυλακῆς γάμων Kal σωφροσύνης γυναικῶν νομο- 
~ - \ > / 
θετεῖν οὔτε μεῖζον οὔτ᾽ ἔλαττον οὐδὲν ἐπεχείρησαν, 
> ¢ A 
ἀλλ᾽ ws ἀδυνάτου πράγματος ἀπέστησαν" οἱ δὲ 
1 τε Biicheler: ye O. 
2 Kiessling: ἐποιήσαντο O. 
3 ἐκ τῶν πόλεων B: ἐκ τῆς πόλεως [ἂς 


4 ἕνα ἄνδρα Kayser. 
5 εἰς Ο; πρὸς Reiske, 


318 


BOOK II. 24, 2-6 


families, is most likely to enjoy tranquillity ! when 
the lives of the individual citizens are untroubled. 
and to have a very tempestuous time when the 
private affairs of the citizens are in a bad way, and 
that every prudent statesman, whether he be a 
lawgiver or a king, ought to introduce such laws 
as will make the citizens just and temperate in their 
lives. Yet by what practices and by what laws 
this result may be accomplished they do not all 
seem to me to have understood equally well, but 
some of them seem to have gone widely and almost 
completely astray in the principal and fundamental 
parts of their legislation. For example, in the 
matter of marriage and commerce with women, from 
which the lawgiver ought to begin (even as Nature 
has begun thence to form our lives), some, taking 
their example from the beasts, have allowed 
men to have intercourse with women freely and 
promiscuously, thinking thus to free their lives 
from the frenzies of love, to save them from mur- 
derous jealousy, and to deliver them from many 
other evils which come upon both private houses 
and whole States through women. Others have 
banished this wanton and bestial intercourse from 
their States by joining a man to one woman; and 
yet for the preservation of the marriage ties and 
the chastity of women they have never attempted 
to make even the slightest regulation whatsoever, 
but have given up the idea as something im- 


* Literally, “to sail right,” that is, on an even keel. 
Here, as often in Greek writers, the State is likened to a 
ship. 


379 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


” > ΄, > / “ ” = , 
οὔτε ἀνεγγύους ἐποίησαν ὥστερ ἔνιοι τῶν βαρβάρων 
A > / / Μ 5 ~ σ 
τὰς ἀφροδισίους μίξεις οὔτε ἀφῆκαν ὥσπερ Aaxke- 
/ \ ΄ ~ / > \ \ 
δαιμόνιοι Tas τῶν γυναικῶν φυλακάς, ἀλλὰ πολλοὺς 
ἔθεσαν ἐπ᾽ αὐταῖς νόμους σωφρονιστάς. εἰσὶ δ᾽ ot 
> 
Kal ἀρχήν τινα κατέστησαν ἐπιμελησομένην εὖ- 
~ \ > ~ ε 
κοσμίας γυναικῶν: οὐ μὴν ἀποχρῶσά γε ἡ πρόνοια 
~ ~ / > A / ~ 
αὐτῶν τῆς τηρήσεως, ἀλλὰ μαλακωτέρα τοῦ δέοντος 
ς \ \ 
ἐγένετο καὶ οὐχ ἱκανὴ THY! μὴ σπουδαίᾳ φύσει 
/ A 
κεκραμένην εἰς ἀνάγκην βίου σώφρονος ἀγαγεῖν. 
« « , \ 
XXV. ‘O δὲ Ῥωμύλος οὔτε ἀνδρὶ κατὰ γυναικὸς 
> , \ / 1 \ > 207 
ἐγκλήματα δοὺς φθαρείσης ἢ τὸν οἶκον ἀδίκως 
“- > 
ἀπολιπούσης οὔτε γαμετῇ κατ᾽ ἀνδρὸς αἰτιωμένῃ 
κάκωσιν ἢ ἄδικον ἀπόλειψιν οὔτε περὶ προικὸς 
5 / Ἃ ~ 4 \ ” Μ ~ 
ἀποδόσεως ἢ κομιδῆς νόμους θεὶς οὔτε ἄλλο τῶν 
/ Ε] ~ 
παραπλησίων τούτοις διορίσας οὐδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν, ἕνα δὲ 
¢ GS "Ὁ ‘ 
νόμον 2 ὑπὲρ ἁπάντων εὖ ἔχοντα, ὡς αὐτὰ τὰ ἔργα 
/ >] 
ἐδήλωσε, καταστησάμενος εἰς σωφροσύνην Kal 
/ , A a = ° 
πολλὴν εὐκοσμίαν ἃ ἤγαγε Tas γυναῖκας ἦν δὲ 
- \ A \ 
τοιόσδε ὁ νόμος: γυναῖκα γαμετὴν THY κατὰ yd- 
- ~ > ¢ 
μους" ἱεροὺς συνελθοῦσαν ἀνδρὶ κοινωνὸν ἁπάντων 
ς ~ > 
εἶναι χρημάτων τε Kal ἱερῶν. ἐκάλουν δὲ τοὺς 
«ς \ / «ς rien 
ἱεροὺς καὶ νομίμους ot παλαιοὶ γάμους “PwpaikA 
/ > ~ 
προσηγορίᾳ περιλαμβάνοντες φαρραχείους ὃ ἐπὶ τῆς 
~ Δ ~ ¢ - 
κοινωνίας τοῦ φαρρός, ὃ καλοῦμεν ἡμεῖς ζέαν. αὕτη 
1 τὴν Ambrosch: τῶ B, τὸ A. 
* νόμον Kiessling: μόνον O. 
3 εἰς εὐφροσύνην μᾶλλον δὲ σωφροσύνην καὶ πολλὴν εὐκοσμίαν 
Β, εἰς εὐκοσμίαν καὶ πολλὴν σωφροσύνην Α. 
4 γυναῖκας B: γαμετάς R. 5 γάμους Sintenis: νόμους Ο. 
6 φαρραχίους A, φαρραγχείους B: φαρράκια Steph. The 
correct form would seem to be either φαρρακίους or 
φαρρακέους. 


380 


BOOK II. 24, 6-25, 2 


practicable. Others have neither permitted sexual 
intercourse without marriage, like some barbarians, 
nor neglected the guarding of their women, like the 
Lacedaemonians, but have established many laws 
to keep them within bounds. And some have even 
appointed a magistrate to look after the good con- 
duct of women; this provision, however, for their 
guarding was found insufficient and too weak to 
accomplish its purpose, being incapable of bringing 
the woman of unvirtuous nature to the necessity 
of a modest behaviour. 

XXY. But Romulus, without giving either to 
the husband an action against his wife for adultery 
or for leaving his home without cause, or to the wife 
an action against her husband on the ground of 
ill-usage! or for leaving her without reason, and 
without making any laws for the returning or re- 
covery of the dowry, or regulating anything of this 
nature, by a single law which effectually provides 
for all these things, as the results themselves have 
shown, led the women to behave themselves with 
modesty and great decorum. The law was to this 
effect, that a woman joined to her husband by a 
holy marriage should share in all his possessions 
and sacred rites. The ancient Romans designated 
holy and lawful marriages by the term “ farreate,”’ ? 
from the sharing of far, which we call zea*®; for 


1The term can also mean the mismanagement of her 
property. 

2 Farracius or farraceus is an adjective, “οἱ spelt.” It 
is not used by any extant writer in connexion with 
marriages ; but we do find the participles farreatus and 
confarreatus thus used, and especially the noun confarreatio. 
See note 2, p. 383. 

8 Both words mean “ spelt,’ a coarse variety of wheat. 


381 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


yap ἦν ἀρχαία Kai μέχρι πολλοῦ συνήθης ἅπασιν 
αὐτοῖς ἡ τροφή: φέρει δὲ πολλὴν καὶ καλὴν ἡ “Pw- 
μαίων γῆ τὴν ζέαν.: καὶ ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς ot? Ἕλληνες 
τὸν κρίθινον καρπὸν ἀρχαιότατον ὑπολαμβάνοντες 
ἐπὶ τῶν θυσιῶν κριθαῖς καταρχόμεθα οὐλὰς ὃ αὐτὰς 
καλοῦντες, οὕτω “Ρωμαῖοι τιμιώτατόν τε καρπὸν 
καὶ ἀρχαιότατον εἶναι νομίζοντες τὰς ζέας διὰ 
τούτων ἁπάσης ἐμπύρου θυσίας κατάρχονται. μένει 
γὰρ ἔτι καὶ οὐ μεταπέπτωκεν εἰς πολυτελεστέρας 
ἀπαρχὰς 4 τὸ ἔθος. τὸ δὴ κοινωνοὺς τῆς ἱερωτάτης 
τε καὶ πρώτης τροφῆς γενέσθαι γυναῖκας ἀνδράσι 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῇ ὅλῃ " συνελθεῖν τύχῃ τὴν μὲν ἐπίκλησιν 
τῆς κοινωνίας τοῦ φαρρὸς εἶχεν, εἰς σύνδεσμον δ᾽ 
ἀναγκαῖον οἰκειότητος ἔφερεν ἀδιαλύτου, καὶ τὸ 
διαιρῆσον τοὺς γάμους τούτους οὐδὲν ἦν. οὗτος ὁ 
νόμος τάς τε γυναῖκας ἠνάγκασε τὰς γαμετάς, οἷα 
δὴ μηδεμίαν ἐχούσας ἑτέραν ἀποστροφήν, πρὸς ἕνα 
τὸν τοῦ γεγαμηκότος ζῆν τρόπον, καὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας 
ὡς ἀναγκαίου τε καὶ ἀναφαιρέτου κτήματος τῆς 
γυναικὸς κρατεῖν. σωφρονοῦσα μὲν οὖν καὶ πάντα 
τῷ γεγαμηκότι πειθομένη γυνὴ κυρία τοῦ οἴκου 
τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον ἦν, ὅνπερ ὃ ὁ ἀνήρ, καὶ τελευτή- 
σαντος ἀνδρὸς κληρονόμος ἐγίνετο τῶν χρημάτων, 
ὡς θυγάτηρ πατρός, εἰ μὲν ἄπαις τε καὶ μηδὲν 
διαθέμενος ἀποθάνοι πάντων οὖσα κυρία τῶν ἀπο- 
λειφθέντων, εἰ δὲ γενεὰν ἔχοι τοῖς παισὶν ἰσόμοιρος 
1 τὴν ζέαν deleted by Reudler, Jacoby. 
2 ἡμεῖς οἱ added by Reiske. 3 οὐλὰς B: odas R. 


4 ἀπαρχὰς Steph. : ἀρχὰς O. 
5 τῇ ὅλῃ Reiske: πολλῇ Ο. 


382 


BOOK II. 25, 2-5 


this was the ancient and, for a long time, the ordinary 
food of all the Romans, and their country produces 
an abundance of excellent spelt. And as we Greeks 
regard barley as the most ancient grain, and for that 
reason begin our sacrifices with barley-corns which 
we call oulai, so the Romans, in the belief that spelt is 
both the most valuable and the most ancient of grains, 
in all burnt offerings begin the sacrifice with that.! 
For this custom still remains, not having deteri- 
orated into first-offerings of greater expense. The 
participation of the wives with their husbands in 
this holiest and first food and their union with them 
founded on the sharing of all their fortunes took its 
name 2 from this sharing of the spelt and forged the 
compelling bond of an indissoluble union, and there 
was nothing that could annul these marriages. This 
law obliged both the married women, as having 
no other refuge, to conform themselves entirely to 
the temper of their husbands, and the husbands 
to rule their wives as necessary and inseparable 
possessions. Accordingly, if a wife was virtuous and 
in all things obedient to het husband, she was mistress 
of the house to the same degree as her husband was 
master of it, and after the death of her husband she 
was heir to his property in the same manner as 
a daughter was to that of her father; that is, if 
he died without children and intestate, she was 
mistress of all that he left, and if he had children, 
she shared equally with them. But if she did any 


1 The mola salsa. 2 Confarreatio. 





δ ὅνπερ B: ὅνπερ και R, Jacoby. 


383 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


6 γινομένη. ἁμαρτάνουσα δέ τι δικαστὴν τὸν ἀδικού- 
μενον ἐλάμβανε καὶ τοῦ μεγέθους τῆς τιμωρίας 
κύριον. ταῦτα δὲ οἱ συγγενεῖς μετὰ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς 
ἐδίκαζον. ἐν οἷς ἦν φθορὰ σώματος καί, ὃ πάντων 
ἐλάχιστον ἁμαρτημάτων Ἕλλησι δόξειεν ἂν ὑπάρχειν, 
εἴ τις οἶνον εὑρεθείη πιοῦσα γυνή. ἀμφότερα γὰρ 
ταῦτα θανάτῳ ζημιοῦν συνεχώρησεν ὁ “Ῥωμύλος, 
ὡς ἁμαρτημάτων γυναικείων ἔσχατα, φθορὰν μὲν 

7 ἀπονοίας ἀρχὴν νομίσας, μέθην δὲ φθορᾶς. καὶ 
μέχρι πολλοῦ διέμεινε χρόνου ταῦτ᾽ ἀμφότερα παρὰ 
“Ρωμαίοις ἀπαραιτήτου τυγχάνοντα ὀργῆς. μάρτυς 
δὲ τοῦ καλῶς ἔχειν τὸν περὶ τῶν γυναικῶν νόμον ὃ 
πολὺς χρόνος. ὁμολογεῖται γὰρ ἐντὸς ἐτῶν εἴκοσι 
καὶ πεντακοσίων μηδεὶς ἐν Ρώμῃ λυθῆναι γάμος" 
κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἑβδόμην ἐπὶ ταῖς τριάκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν 
ὀλυμπιάσιν ὑπατευόντων Μάρκου ]Π]ομπωνίου καὶ 
Γαΐου Ilampiov πρῶτος ἀπολῦσαι λέγεται τὴν 
ἑαυτοῦ γυναῖκα Σπόριος Καρουΐλιος 5 ἀνὴρ οὐκ 
ἀφανής, ἀναγκαζόμενος ὑπὸ τῶν τιμητῶν ὀμόσαι 
τέκνων ἕνεκα γυναικὶ συνοικεῖν (ἦν δ᾽ αὐτῷ στείρα 
ἡ γυνή), ὃς ἐπὶ τῷ ἔργῳ τούτῳ καίτοι du’ ἀνάγκην 
γενομένῳ μισούμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου διετέλεσεν. 


1 ἔσχατα O: αἴσχιστα Grasberger, Jacoby. 
2 Καρουΐλιος Ambrosch: καὶ ῥουίλιος AB. 





1231 B.c. 

2 Gellius (iv. 3), Valerius Maximus (ii. 1, 4) and Plutarch 
(Thes. et Rom. 6) give this same tradition regarding 
Carvilius, but differ widely as to his date. Gellius is in 
virtual agreement with Dionysius, but Valerius gives 


384 


BOOK II. 25, 6-7 


wrong, the injured party was her judge and deter- 
mined the degree of her punishment. Other offences, 
however, were judged by her relations together with 
her husband ; among them was adultery, or where it 
was found she had ΤΣ ΣΟΤΕ wine—a thing which the 
Greeks would look upon as the least of all faults. 
For Romulus permitted them to punish both these 
acts with death, as being the gravest offences women 
could be guilty of, since he looked upon adultery as the 
source af reckless folly. and drunkenness as the source 
of adultery. And both these offences continued for 
a long time to be punished by the Romans with 
merciless severity. The wisdom of this law concern- 
ing wives is attested by the length of time it was in 
force ; for it is agreed that during the space of five 
hundred and twenty years no marriage was ever dis- 
solved at Rome. But it is said that in the one 
hundred and thirty-seventh Olympiad, in the con- 
sulship of Marcus Pomponius and Gaius Papirius,} 
Spurius Carvilius, a man of distinction, was the 
first to divorce his wife,? and that he was obliged 
by the censors to swear that he had married for the 
purpose of having children (his wife, it seems, was 
barren); yet because of his action, though it was 
based on necessity, he was ever afterwards hated 
by the people. 

604 B.c. and Plutarch 524. Moreover, Valerius states 
elsewhere (ii. 9, 2) that L. Annius repudiated his wife in 
307/6, a date confirmed by Livy (ix. 43, 25). It seems 
most probable that Dionysius and Gellius are wrong in 
their date. Scholars who accept this late date admit an 
earlier voluntary dissolution of marriage or assume that 


the ancient authors were thinking of different forms of 
marriage or of different grounds for divorce. 


385 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Ζ' “a - => « 
XXVI. ‘A μὲν οὖν εἰς γυναῖκας εὖ ἔχοντα 6 
*P iA > θέ > - / \ 
ὠμύλος ἐνομοθέτησεν, ἐξ ὧν κοσμιωτέρας περὶ 
» “- 
τοὺς ἄνδρας αὐτὰς ἀπειργάσατο, ταῦτ᾽ ἐστίν, ἃ δ᾽ 
> >] ~ \ / / σ / A 
εἰς αἰδῶ Kal δικαιοσύνην παίδων, ἵνα σέβωσι τοὺς 
ο an 
πατέρας ἅπαντα πράττοντές Te καὶ λέγοντες ὅσα ἂν 
δι αὶ τὰ 
ἐκεῖνοι κελεύωσιν, ἔτι τούτων ἦν σεμνότερα καὶ 
μεγαλοπρεπέστερα καὶ πολλὴν ἔχοντα παρὰ τοὺς 
e / / v ¢ \ \ \ « 
ἡμετέρους νόμους διαφοράν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ τὰς ᾿Ελ- 
’ 
ληνικὰς καταστησάμενοι πολιτείας βραχύν τινα 
~ \ “- A 
κομιδῇ χρόνον ἔταξαν ἄρχεσθαι τοὺς παῖδας ὑπὸ 
΄ > 
TOV πατέρων, οἱ μὲν ἕως TplTov! ἐκπληρώσωσιν 
> - De ” ¢ A 4 zal / J, / 
ἀφ᾽ ἥβης ἔτος, ot δὲ ὅσον av χρόνον ἠίθεοι μένωσιν, 
ἐς ~ ~ > ~ 
οἱ δὲ μέχρι τῆς εἰς τὰ ἀρχεῖα τὰ δημόσια ἐγγραφῆς, 
ς > ~ / \ ~ \ / 
ws ἐκ τῆς Σόλωνος καὶ {Πιττακοῦ καὶ Χαρώνδου 
νομοθεσίας ἔμαθον, οἷς πολλὴ μαρτυρεῖται σοφία" 
~ UY > > ~ 
τιμωρίας Te κατὰ τῶν παίδων ἔταξαν, ἐὰν ἀπειθῶσι 
=~ >? ~ gee 
τοῖς πατράσιν, οὐ βαρείας, ἐξελάσαι τῆς οἰκίας 
> \ A 
ἐπιτρέψαντες αὐτοὺς καὶ χρήματα μὴ καταλιπεῖν, 
ε ~ 
περαιτέρω δὲ οὐδέν. εἰσὶ δ᾽ οὐχ ἱκαναὶ κατασχεῖν 
> > A 
ἄνοιαν νεότητος καὶ αὐθάδειαν τρόπων οὐδ᾽ εἰς TO 
~ A ~ ~ ε 
σῶφρον ἀγαγεῖν τοὺς ἠμεληκότας τῶν καλῶν at 
λακαὶ ! Ἵ λλὰ ἐν “EX 
μαλακαὶ τιμωρίαι: τοιγάρτοι πολλὰ ἐν now 
a“ «ς \ ~ 
ὑπὸ τέκνων εἰς πατέρας ἀσχημονεῖται. ὁ δὲ τῶν 
> ~ 2 
“Ρωμαίων νομοθέτης ἅπασαν ὡς εἰπεῖν ἔδωκεν 
ς» \ / \ ~ 
ἐξουσίαν πατρὶ καθ᾽ υἱοῦ καὶ παρὰ πάντα τὸν τοῦ 
> ~ 7 
βίου χρόνον, ἐάν τε εἴργειν, ἐάν τε μαστιγοῦν, ἐάν 
~ > > \ ” / 
Te δέσμιον ἐπὶ τῶν κατ᾽ ἀγρὸν ἔργων κατέχειν, 
-“- \ \ \ 
ἐάν τε ἀποκτιννύναι προαιρῆται, κἂν τὰ πολιτικὰ 
- / nn > > a - 
πράττων ὁ παῖς ἤδη τυγχάνῃ κἂν ἐν ἀρχαῖς ταῖς 


1 δεύτερον Bicheler. 


386 


BOOK II. 26, 1-4 


XXVI. These, then, are the excellent laws which 
Romulus enacted concerning women, by which he 
rendered them more observant of propriety in re- 
lation to their husbands. But those he established 
with respect to reverence and dutifulness of children 
toward their parents, to the end that they should 
honour and obey them in all things, both in their 
words and actions, were still more august and of 
greater dignity and vastly superior to our laws. 
For those who established the Greek constitutions 
set a very short time for sons to be under the rule 
of their fathers, some till the expiration of the third 
year after they reached manhood, others as long 
as they continued unmarried, and some till their 
names were entered in the public registers, as I 
have learned from the laws of Solon, Pittacus and 
Charondas, men celebrated for their great wisdom. 
The punishments, also, which they ordered for dis- 
obedience in children toward their parents were not 
grievous : for they permitted fathers to turn their sons 
out of doors and to disinherit them, but nothing 
further. But mild punishments are not sufficient 
to restrain the folly of youth and its stubborn ways 
or to give self-control to those who have been heed- 
less of all that is honourable; and accordingly 
among the Greeks many unseemly deeds are com- 
mitted by children against their parents. But the 
lawgiver of the Romans gave virtually full power 
to the father over his son, even during his whole 
life, whether he thought proper to imprison him, to 
scourge him, to put him in chains and keep him at 
work in the fields, or to put him to death, and this 
even though the son were already engaged in public 
affairs, though he were numbered among the highest 


387 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μεγίσταις ἐξεταζόμενος Kav διὰ τὴν εἰς τὰ κοινὰ 
φιλοτιμίαν ἐπαινούμενος. κατὰ τοῦτόν γέ τοι τὸν 
νόμον ἄνδρες ἐπιφανεῖς δημηγορίας διεξιόντες ἐπὶ 
τῶν ἐμβόλων ἐναντίας μὲν τῇ βουλῇ, κεχαρισμένας 
δὲ τοῖς δημοτικοῖς, καὶ σφόδρα εὐδοκιμοῦντες ἐπὶ 
ταύταις, κατασπασθέντες ἀπὸ τοῦ βήματος ἀπ- 
ἤχθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν πατέρων, ἣν ἂν ἐκείνοις φανῇ 
τιμωρίαν ὑφέξοντες. οὗς ἀπαγομένους διὰ τῆς 
ἀγορᾶς οὐδεὶς τῶν παρόντων ἐξελέσθαι δυνατὸς Hv 
οὔτε ὕπατος οὔτε δήμαρχος οὔτε ὁ κολακευόμενος 
ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ! πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν ἐλάττω τῆς ἰδίας 
εἶναι νομίζων ὄχλος. ἐῶ γὰρ λέγειν ὅσους ἀπ- 
έκτειναν οἱ πατέρες ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς ὑπ᾽ ἀρετῆς καὶ 
προθυμίας ἕτερόν τι διαπράξασθαι γενναῖον ἔργον 3 
προαχθέντας ὃ μὴ προσέταξαν αὐτοῖς οἱ πατέρες, 
καθάπερ ἐπὶ ῆωχαλλίου Τορκουάτου καὶ πολλῶν 
ἄλλων παρειλήφαμεν, ὑπὲρ ὧν κατὰ τὸν οἰκεῖον 
καιρὸν ἐρῶ. 

XXVIII. Kai οὐδ᾽ ἐνταῦθα ἔστη τῆς ἐξουσίας ὁ 
τῶν “Ῥωμαίων νομοθέτης, ἀλλὰ καὶ πωλεῖν ἐφῆκε 
τὸν υἱὸν τῷ πατρί, οὐδὲν ἐπιστραφεὶς εἴ τις ὠμὸν 
ὑπολήψεται τὸ συγχώρημα καὶ βαρύτερον ἢ κατὰ 
τὴν φυσικὴν συμπάθειαν. καὶ ὃ πάντων μάλιστα 
θαυμάσειεν ἄν τις ὑπὸ τοῖς ᾿λληνικοῖς ἤθεσι τοῖς 


1 καὶ Reiske: κατὰ Ο. 
* γενναῖον ἔργον R: ἔργον γενναῖον Β, Jacoby. 





1The son of the Manlius Torquatus who was consul in 
340 B.c. Just before the battle with the Latins at the 
foot of Mt. Vesuvius the consuls issued strict orders that 
no Roman should engage in single combat with a Latin on 


388 


BOOK II. 26, 4-27, 1 


magistrates, and though he were celebrated for his 
zeal for the commonwealth. Indeed, in virtue of this 
law men of distinction, while delivering speeches 
from the rostra hostile to the senate and _ pleas- 
ing to the people, and enjoying great popularity 
on that account, have been dragged down from 
thence and carried away by their fathers to undergo 
such punishment as these thought fit; and while 
they were being led away through the Forum, none 
present, neither consul, tribune, nor the very popu- 
lace, which was flattered by them and thought all 
power inferior to its own, could rescue them. I 
forbear to mention how many brave men, urged 
by their valour and zeal to perform some noble 
deed that their fathers had not ordered, have been 
put to death by those very fathers, as is related 
of Manlius Torquatus! and many others. But con- 
cerning them I shall speak in the proper place. 
XXVIT. And not even at this point did the Roman 
lawgiver stop in giving the father power over the 
son, but he even allowed him to sell his son, without 
concerning himself whether this permission might 
be regarded as cruel and harsher than was com- 
patible with natural affection. And,—a thing which 
anyone who has been educated in the lax manners 
of the Greeks may wonder at above all things and 


pain of death; but this youth could not resist the taunts 
of a Tusculan foe, and accepted his challenge. When he 
returned triumphantly with the spoils of his enemy, 
his father ordered his death. The portion of the Anti- 
quities in which this incident was related is no longer 
extant, 


389 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


3 4 \ ε \ \ 4 
ἐκλελυμένοις τραφεὶς ὡς πικρὸν Kal τυραννικόν, 
καὶ τοῦτο συνεχώρησε τῷ πατρί, μέχρι τρίτης 
πράσεως ad υἱοῦ χρηματίσασθαι, μείζονα δοὺς 
ἐξουσίαν πατρὶ κατὰ παιδὸς ἢ δεσπότῃ κατὰ δού- 
λ 1 θ / \ \ 2 ες \ ΄“ 
ων. εραπόντων μὲν yap” ὁ πραθεὶς ἅπαξ, 
ἔπειτα τὴν ἐλευθερίαν εὑρόμενος αὑτοῦ τὸ λοιπὸν 
ἤδη κύριός ἐστιν, υἱὸς δὲ πραθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς 
~ > 
et γένοιτο ἐλεύθερος ὑπὸ τῷ πατρὶ πάλιν ἐγίνετο, 
δ \ ὃ / > / πόδι θ A 
Kai? τὸ δεύτερον ἀπεμποληθείς Te καὶ ἐλευθερωθεὶς 
δοῦλος ὥσπερ ἐξ ἀρχῆς τοῦ πατρὸς Hv μετὰ δὲ 
τὴν τρίτην πρᾶσιν ἀπήλλακτο τοῦ πατρός. τοῦτον 
‘ / > > ΄ A € ~ > ΄ "» 
τὸν νόμον ἐν ἀρχαῖς μὲν ot βασιλεῖς ἐφύλαττον εἴτε 
γεγραμμένον εἴτε ἄγραφον (οὐ γὰρ ἔχω τὸ σαφὲς 
εἰπεῖν) ἁπάντων κράτιστον ἡγούμενοι νόμων. κατα- 
~ 4 ~ > 
λυθείσης δὲ τῆς μοναρχίας, ὅτε πρῶτον ἐφάνη 
ς ‘ 
᾿ωμαίοις ἅπαντες τοὺς πατρίους ἐθισμούς τε καὶ 
νόμους ἅμα τοῖς ἐπεισάκτοις ἐν ἀγορᾷ θεῖναι φανε- 
ροὺς ἅπασι τοῖς πολίταις, ἵνα μὴ συμμεταπίπτῃ τὰ 
~ ~ ¢ 
κοινὰ δίκαια ταῖς τῶν ἀρχόντων ἐξουσίαις, ot λαβόν- 
τες παρὰ τοῦ δήμου τὴν ἐξουσίαν τῆς συναγωγῆς τε 
\ > ~ > ~ / » A ~ » 
καὶ ἀναγραφῆς αὐτῶν δέκα ἄνδρες ἅμα τοῖς ἄλλοις 
> ~ / ~ 
ἀνέγραψαν νόμοις, Kal ἔστιν ἐν TH τετάρτῃ τῶν 
/ / / a > / > > ~ 
λεγομένων δώδεκα δέλτων, ἃς ἀνέθεσαν ἐν ἀγορᾷ. 
-“ > > ¢ / »” 5 ¢ , » 
ὅτι δ᾽ οὐχ οἱ δέκα ἀνδρες 5 οἱ τριακοσίοις ἔτεσιν 
\ ~ / 
ὕστερον ἀποδειχθέντες ἐπὶ τὴν ἀναγραφὴν τῶν νόμων 
΄ ~ ¢ ΄ 
πρῶτοι τοῦτον εἰσηγήσαντο τὸν νόμον “Ρωμαίοις, 
> > > = / / +) > ΄ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ πολλοῦ κείμενον παραλαβόντες οὐκ ἐτόλ- 
> ~ bl ~ \ ‘ ᾿" 
μησαν ἀνελεῖν, ἐκ πολλῶν μὲν καὶ ἄλλων κατα- 
1 δούλων B: δούλου A. ὃ γὰρ Reudler: ye O. 
ὅ καὶ Kayser: κἂν Ο, * γόμων B: νόμον A, Jacoby. 


BOOK II. 27, 1-4 


look upon as harsh and tyrannical,—he even gave 
leave to the father to make a profit by selling his 
son as often as three times, thereby giving greater 
power to the father over his son than to the master 
over his slaves. For a slave who has once been sold 
and has later obtained his liberty is his own master 
ever after, but a son who had once been sold by 
his father, if he became free, came again under his 
father’s power, and if he was a second time sold and 
a second time freed, he was still, as at first, his 
father’s slave ; but after the third sale he was freed 
from his father. This law, whether written or 
unwritten, —I cannot say positively which, — the 
kings observed in the beginning, looking upon it as 
the best of all laws; and after the overthrow of 
the monarchy, when the Romans first decided to 
expose in the Forum for the consideration of the 
whole body of citizens all their ancestral customs 
and laws, together with those introduced from 
abroad, to the end that the rights of the people 
might not be changed as often as the powers of 
the magistrates, the decemvirs, who were authorized 
by the people to collect and transcribe the laws, 
recorded it among the rest, and it now stands on the 
fourth of the Twelve Tables, as they are called. which 
they then set up in the Forum. And that the de- 
cemvirs, who were appointed after three hundred 
years to transcribe these laws, did not first introduce 
this law among the Romans, but that, finding it 
long before in use, they dared not repeal it, I infer 
from many other considerations and particularly 





ὃ οἱ δέκα ἄνδρες Cobet ; οἱ ἄνδρες δέκα Ο, 


991 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


λαμβάνομαι, μάλιστα δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν Νόμα Πομπιλίου 
τοῦ μετὰ Ῥωμύλον ἀρξαντος νόμων, ἐν οἷς καὶ οὗτος 
γέγραπται. “Hav πατὴρ υἱῷ συγχωρήσῃ γυναῖκα 
ἀγαγέσθαι κοινωνὸν ἐσομένην ἱερῶν τε καὶ χρημά- 
των κατὰ τοὺς νόμους, μηκέτι τὴν ἐξουσίαν εἶναι 
τῷ πατρὶ πωλεῖν τὸν υἱόν -᾿᾿ ὅπερ οὐκ ἂν ἔγραψεν εἰ 
μὴ κατὰ τοὺς προτέρους νόμους ἅπαντας ἐξῆν τῷ 
πατρὶ πωλεῖν τοὺς υἱούς. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων 
ἅλις, βούλομαι δὲ καὶ τὸν ἄλλον ἐπὶ κεφαλαίων ἷ 
διελθεῖν κόσμον, ᾧ τοὺς τῶν ἰδιωτῶν ὁ “Ῥωμύλος 
ἐκόσμησε βίους. 

XXVIII. ᾿Ορῶν γὰρ ὅτι τὸ σωφρόνως ζῆν ἅπαν- 
τας καὶ τὰ δίκαια πρὸ τῶν κερδαλέων αἱρεῖσθαι 
καρτερίαν τε τὴν παρὰ τοὺς πόνους ἀσκεῖν καὶ μηδὲν 
ὑπολαμβάνειν χρῆμα τιμιώτερον ἀρετῆς οὐ λόγων 
διδαχῇ παραγίνεσθαι τοῖς πολιτικοῖς πλήθεσι πέφυ- 
κεν, ἐν οἷς τὸ πλεῖόν ἐστι δυσάγωγον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔργων 
ἐθισμοῖς τῶν πρὸς ἑκάστην ἀρετὴν ἀγόντων, ὑπ᾽ 
ἀνάγκης τε μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ γνώμην ἐπ᾽ αὐτὰ τοὺς 
πολλοὺς παραγινομένους," εἰ δὲ μηδὲν εἴη τὸ κω- 
λῦσον ἐπὶ τὴν φύσιν ὀλισθαίνοντας εἰδώς, ἐπιδιφρίους 
μὲν καὶ βαναύσους καὶ προσαγωγοὺς ἐπιθυμιῶν 
αἰσχρῶν τέχνας, ὡς ἀφανιζούσας καὶ λυμαινομένας 
τά τε σώματα καὶ τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν μεταχειριζομένων, 
δούλοις καὶ ξένοις ἀπέδωκε μεθοδεύειν: καὶ διέ- 
μεινεν ἕως πολλοῦ πάνυ χρόνου δι᾿ αἰσχύνης ὄντα 
Ρωμαίοις τὰ τοιαῦτα ἔργα καὶ ὑπ᾽ οὐδενὸς τῶν 
αὐθιγενῶν ἐπιτηδευόμενα. δύο δὲ μόνα τοῖς ἐλευθέ- 

+Sylburg: κεφαλαίῳ O. 
* παραγομένους Kiessling, Hertlein. 


392 


BOOK II. 27, 4-28, 2 


from the laws of Numa Pompilius, the successor of 
Romulus, among which there is recorded the fol- 
lowing: “If a father gives his son leave to marry 
a woman who by the laws is to be the sharer of his 
sacred rites and possessions, he shall no longer have 
the power of selling his son.” Now he would never 
have written this unless the father had by all former 
laws been allowed to sell his sons. But enough has 
been said concerning these matters, and I desire also 
to give a summary account of the other measures 
by which Romulus regulated the lives of the private 
citizens. 

XXVIII. Observing that the means by which the 
whole body of citizens, the greater part of whom are 
hard to guide, can be induced to lead a life of modera- 
tion, to prefer justice to gain, to cultivate persever- 
ance in hardships, and to look upon nothing as more 
valuable than virtue, is not oral instruction, but the 
habitual practice of such employments as lead to 
each virtue, and knowing that the great mass of 
men come to practise them through necessity rather 
than choice, and hence, if there is nothing to restrain 
them, return to their natural disposition, he appointed 
slaves and foreigners to exercise those trades that 
are sedentary and mechanical and promote shameful 
passions, looking upon them as the destroyers and 
corruptors both of the bodies and souls of all who 
practise them; and such trades were for a very 
long time held i in disgrace by the Romans and were 
carried on by none of the native-born citizens. The 
only employments he left to free men were two. 


393 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


pos ἐπιτηδεύματα κατέλιπε τά τε κατὰ γεωργίαν 
καὶ τὰ κατὰ πολέμους, ὁρῶν ὅτι γαστρός τε ἄν- 
θρωποι γίνονται διὰ τούτους τοὺς βίους ἐγκρατεῖς 
ἀφροδισίοις τε ἧττον ἁλίσκονται παρανόμοις πλε- 
ονεξίαν τε οὐ τὴν βλάπτουσαν ἀλλήλους διώκουσιν, 
ἀλλὰ τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν πολεμίων περιποιουμένην τὰς 
ὠφελείας. ἀτελῆ δὲ τούτων ἑκάτερον ἡγούμενος 
εἶναι τῶν βίων χωριζόμενον θατέρου καὶ φιλαίτιον, 
οὐχ ἑτέροις μέν τισιν ἀπέδωκεν ἐργάζεσθαι τὴν γῆν, 
ἑτέροις δὲ τὰ πολεμίων φέρειν τε καὶ ἄγειν ὡς ὁ 
παρὰ Λακεδαιμονίοις εἶχε νόμος, ἀλλὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς 
τόν τε πολεμικὸν καὶ τὸν γεωργικὸν ἔταξε βίον 
ζῆν: εἰ μὲν εἰρήνην ἄγοιεν ἐπὶ τοῖς κατ᾽ ἀγρὸν 
ἔργοις ἐθίζων ἅπαντας μένειν, πλὴν εἴ ποτε δεηθεῖεν 
ἀγορᾶς, τότε δ᾽ εἰς ἄστυ συνιόντας ἀγοράζειν, ἐνάτην 
ὁρίζων ἡμέραν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς - ὅτε δὲ πόλεμος κατα- 
λάβοι στρατεύεσθαι διδάσκων καὶ μὴ παραχωρεῖν 
ἑτέροις μήτε τῶν πόνων μήτε τῶν ὠφελειῶν. διήρει 
γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἐξ ἴσου γῆν τε ὅσην ἂν ἀφέλοιτο ὃ πολε- 
μίους καὶ ἀνδράποδα καὶ χρήματα, καὶ παρεσκεύαζεν 
ἀγαπητῶς δέχεσθαι τὰς στρατείας. 

XXIX. Τῶν δ᾽ εἰς ἀλλήλους ἀδικημάτων οὐ 
χρονίους ἀλλὰ ταχείας ἐποιεῖτο τὰς κρίσεις τὰ μὲν 
αὐτὸς διαιτῶν, τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλοις ἐπιτρέπων, καὶ τὰς 


1 κατέλιπε τά τε κατὰ Ambrosch: καταλείπεται τὰ κατὰ O 


2 ἀφέλοιτο B: ἀφέλοιντο R. 





1The Spartan masters were the warrior class and the 
Helots were primarily tillers of the soil. Nevertheless, 
each Spartan soldier was accompanied to war by several 
Helots, who fought as light-armed troops. 


394 


BOOK II. 28, 2-29, 1 


agriculture and warfare; for he observed that men 
so employed become masters of their appetite, are 
less entangled in illicit love affairs, and follow that 
kind of covetousness only which leads them, not to 
injure one another, but to enrich themselves at 
the expense of the enemy. But, as he regarded 
each of these occupations, when separate from the 
other, as incomplete and conducive to fault-finding, 
instead of appointing one part of the men to till 
the land and the other to lay waste the enemy’s 
country, according to the practice of the Lace- 
daemonians,' he ordered the same persons to exercise 
the employments both of husbandmen and soldiers. 
In time of peace he accustomed them to remain 
at their tasks in the country, except when it was 
necessary for them to come to market, upon which 
occasions they were to meet in the city in orde: to 
traffic, and to that end he appointed every ninth 2 
day for the markets ; and when war came he taught 
them to perform the duties of soldiers and not to 
yield to others either in the hardships or advantages 
that war brought. For he divided equally among 
them the lands, slaves and money that he took from 
the enemy, and thus caused them to take part cheer- 
fully in his campaigns. 

XXIX. In the case of wrongs committed by 
the citizens against one another he did not permit 
the trials to be delayed, but caused them to be held 
promptly, sometimes deciding the suits himself 
and sometimes referring them to others; and he 


#«* Every ninth day,” reckoning inclusively, means 
every eighth day by modern reckoning. The name of 
these market-days was nundinae, from novem and dies. 


395 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ ~ « 
τιμωρίας αὐτῶν πρὸς τὰ μεγέθη τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων 
, > 
ἐποιεῖτο. ἀποτρέπειν te ἀνθρώπους ἀπὸ παντὸς 
~ / ~ 
ἔργου πονηροῦ tov φόβον μάλιστα δυνάμενον ὁρῶν 
πολλὰ εἰς τοῦτο παρεσκευάσατο, χωρίον τε, ἐν ᾧ 
7 γ0. , > ~ / ~ 
καθεζόμενος ἐδίκαζεν, ἐν τῷ φανερωτάτῳ τῆς 
ἀγορᾶς, καὶ στρατιωτῶν, ot παρηκολούθουν αὐτῷ 
͵ 
τριακόσιοι τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες, καταπληκτικωτάτην 
, 1 cs ὃ \ λέ ΣΝ. > ~ 
πρόσοψιν, ῥάβδους τε καὶ πελέκεις ὑπ᾽ ἀνδρῶν 
δώδεκα φερομένους, ots? τοὺς μὲν ἄξια μαστίγων 
» > ~ ~ I 
δεδρακότας ἔξαινον ev ἀγορᾷ, τῶν δὲ τὰ μέγιστα 
A / > ‘ > ~ 
ἠδικηκότων τοὺς τραχήλους ἀπέκοπτον ἐν τῷ 
~ ~ Q 7 ¢ s ~ 
φανερῷ. τοιοῦτος μὲν δή τις ὁ κόσμος ἦν τῆς 
͵ « / ‘ 
κατασκευασθείσης ὑπὸ Ῥωμύλου πολιτείας - ἀπόχρη 
γὰρ ἐκ τούτων καὶ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων εἰκάσαι. 
XXX. Ai δὲ ἄλλαι πράξεις αἵ τε κατὰ τοὺς 
/ ΄ Q ΄ ς 
πολέμους ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς γενόμεναι καὶ αἱ κατὰ 
2 = / >’ ξ / 
mOoAw,? ὧν av τις Kal Adyov4 ποιήσαιτο ἐν ἱστορίας 
γραφῇ, τοιαῦταί τινες παραδίδονται. πολλῶν 
\ ΄ > ~ / 
περιοικούντων τὴν Ῥώμην ἐθνῶν μεγάλων τε καὶ 
΄, > / e ρον - «ε 
τὰ πολέμια ἀλκίμων, ὧν οὐδὲν ἦν τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις 
᾿ ~ > 
φίλιον, οἰκειώσασθαι ταῦτα βουληθεὶς ἐπιγαμίαις, 
3 A - $ 
ὅσπερ ἐδόκει τοῖς παλαιοῖς τρόπος εἶναι βεβαιό- 
~ / 3 / A 
τατος τῶν συναπτόντων φιλίας, ἐνθυμούμενος δὲ 
σ / A ¢ / > ἍἋ ΄ 
ὅτι βουλόμεναι μὲν αἵ πόλεις οὐκ ἂν συνέλθοιεν 
τ᾿ a” ΄ὔ 
αὐτοῖς ἄρτι τε συνοικιζομένοις καὶ οὔτε χρήμασι 
Aa ” > 
δυνατοῖς οὔτε λαμπρὸν ἔργον ἀποδεδειγμένοις ὃ 
>] ΄ - \ ” > / ͵ 
οὐδέν, βιασθεῖσαι δὲ εἴξουσιν εἰ μηδεμία γένοιτο 
1 καταπληκτικωτάτην πρόσοψιν R: καταπληκτικώτατοι τὴν 
πρόσοψιν B, Jacoby. 
2 ois Ἐν: ot R. 
ὁ κατὰ πόλιν O: κατὰ τὴν πόλιν Ambrosch, Jacoby. 


996 


BOOK II. 29, 1-30, 2 


proportioned the punishment to the magnitude οἱ 
the crime. Observing, also, that nothing restrains 
men from all evil actions so effectually as fear, he 
contrived many things to inspire it, such as the 
place where he sat in judgment in the most con. 
spicuous part of the Forum, the very formidable 
appearance of the soldiers who attended him, three 
hundred in number, and the rods and axes borne 
by twelve men,’ who scourged in the Forum those 
whose offences deserved it and beheaded others in 
public who were guilty of the greatest crimes. Such. 
then, was the general character of the government 
established by Romulus; the details I have men. 
tioned are sufficient to enable one to form a judg- 
ment of the rest. 

XXX. The? other deeds reported of this man, both 
in his wars and at home, which may be thought 
deserving of mention in a history are as follows. 
Inasmuch as many nations that were both numerous 
and brave in war dwelt round about Rome and none 
of them was friendly to the Romans, he desired 
to conciliate them by intermarriages, which, in the 
opinion of the ancients, was the surest method of 
cementing friendships; but considering that the 
cities in question would not of their own accord 
unite with the Romans, who were just getting settled 
together in one city, and who neither were powerful 
by reason of their wealth nor had performed any 
brilliant exploit, but that they would yield to force 

1 The lictors; cf. Livy i. 8, 2-3. 
? For chaps. 30-31 cf. Livy i. 9. 





4 καὶ λόγον Steph.: κατάλογον O. 
®Garrer: ἐπιδεδειγμένοις O, Jacoby. 


397 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ \ ~ ESPs 4 ΄’ » φ' ι 
περι τὴν ἀνάγκην ὕβρις, γνώμην ἔσχεν, ἧ καὶ 
͵ ε =~ ~ 
Νεμέτωρ ὁ πάππος αὐτοῦ προσέθετο, δι᾽ ἁρπαγῆς 
θέν 10 / , 7 θ \ > 
παρθένων ἀθρόας γενομένης ποιήσασθαι τὰς ἐπι- 
/ ~ ~ 
yapias. γνοὺς δὲ ταῦτα θεῷ μὲν εὐχὰς τίθεται 
~ > 
πρῶτον ἀπορρήτων βουλευμάτων ἡγεμόνι, ἐὰν ἡ 
πεῖρα αὐτῷ χωρήσῃ κατὰ νοῦν θυσίας καὶ ἑορτὰς 
5 ~ 
afew καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐνιαυτόν: ἔπειτα τῷ συνεδρίῳ 
τῆς γερουσίας ἀνενέγκας τὸν λόγον, ἐπειδὴ κἀκείνοις 
\ A 
τὸ βούλευμα ἤρεσκεν, ἑορτὴν προεῖπε καὶ πανήγυριν 
»” ~ ‘ / > \ ” 
ἄξειν [Ποσειδῶνι καὶ περιήγγελλεν eis τὰς ἔγγιστα 
πόλεις καλῶν τοὺς βουλομένους ἀγορᾶς τε μεταλαμ- 
~ » 
βάνειν καὶ ἀγώνων: καὶ γὰρ ἀγῶνας ἕξειν ἔμελλεν 
ἵππων τε καὶ ἀνδρῶν παντοδαπούς. συνελθόντων 
\ ~ ΄, > \ ε \ \ “ 
δὲ πολλῶν Edvwv εἰς τὴν ἑορτὴν γυναιξὶν ἅμα 
\ / > A / / 3 a ~ 
καὶ τέκνοις, ἐπειδὴ τάς τε θυσίας ἐπετέλεσε τῷ 
[oced@vu καὶ τοὺς ἀγῶνας, τῇ τελευταίᾳ τῶν 
ἡμερῶν, ἡ διαλύσειν ἔμελλε τὴν πανήγυριν, παράγ- 
γελμα δίδωσι τοῖς νέοις, ἡνίκ᾽ ἂν αὐτὸς ἄρῃ τὸ 
A > \ 
σημεῖον ἁρπάζειν τὰς παρούσας ἐπὶ τὴν θέαν παρ- 
θένους, αἷς ἂν ἐπιτύχωσιν ἕκαστοι, καὶ φυλάττειν 
~ > tea ε 
ἁγνὰς ἐκείνην τὴν νύκτα, τῇ δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἡμέρᾳ πρὸς 
ἑαυτὸν ἄγειν. ot μὲν δὴ νέοι διαστάντες κατὰ 
/ > \ \ / > \ > ΄ 
συστροφάς, ἐπειδὴ τὸ σύνθημα ἀρθὲν εἶδον τρέ- 
~ ΄ / 
πονται πρὸς τὴν τῶν παρθένων ἁρπαγήν, ταραχὴ 
\ A / 279\ Di. Ἔδ' \ \ ay / 
δὲ τῶν ξένων εὐθὺς ἐγένετο καὶ φυγὴ μεῖζόν τι 
~ > ~ ¢ ~ 
κακὸν ὑφορωμένων τῇ δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἡμέρᾳ προαχθεισῶν 
΄ ~ \ > 
τῶν παρθένων, παραμυθησάμενος αὐτῶν τὴν ἀθυμίαν 


398 


BOOK II. 30, 2-5 


if no insolence accompanied such compulsion, he deter- 
mined, with the approval of Numitor, his grand- 
father, to bring about the desired intermarriages by 
a wholesale seizure of virgins. After he had taken 
this resolution, he first made a vow to the god! who 
presides over secret counsels to celebrate sacrifices 
and festivals every year if his enterprise should suc- 
ceed. Then, having laid his plan before the senate 
and gaining their approval, he announced that he 
would hold a festival and general assemblage in 
honour of Neptune, and he sent word round about to 
the nearest cities, inviting all who wished to do so to 
be present at the assemblage and to take part in the 
contests; for he was going to hold contests of all 
sorts, both between horses and between men. And 
when many strangers came with their wives and 
children to the festival, he first offered the sacrifices 
to Neptune and held the contests; then, on the last 
day, on which he was to dismiss the assemblage, he 
ordered the young men, when he himself should raise 
the signal, to seize all the virgins who had come to the 
spectacle, each group taking those they should first 
encounter, to keep them that night without violating 
their chastity and bring them to him the next day. 
So the young men divided themselves into several 
groups, and as soon as they saw the signal raised, fell 
to seizing the virgins ; and straightway the strangers 
were in an uproar and fled, suspecting some greater 
mischief. The next day, when the virgins were 
brought before Romulus, he comforted them in 


1Consus. See p. 403 and note 1 (end). 
399 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ς -"ὰ @& ~ ς ~ 3 
ὁ ἹΡωμύλος, ὡς οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ὕβρει τῆς ἁρπαγῆς ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ 
͵) ε / > ~ 
γάμῳ γενομένης, ᾿λληνικόν te καὶ ἀρχαῖον ἀπο- 
> 
φαίνων τὸ ἔθος καὶ tpomov! συμπάντων καθ᾽ οὗς 
~ \ 3 
συνάπτονται γάμοι ταῖς γυναιξὶν ἐπιφανέστατον, 
3 / / \ ὃ θ ΄ > ~ »” 5 ε ‘ 
ἠξίου στέργειν τοὺς δοθέντας αὐταῖς ἄνδρας ὑπὸ 
“- ΄ / 
τῆς τύχης" καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο διαριθμήσας τὰς κόρας 
ο \ - 
ἑξακοσίας τε καὶ ὀγδοήκοντα καὶ τρεῖς εὑρεθείσας 
͵ oo > ~ > / » » ͵ 
κατέλεξεν αὖθις ἐκ τῶν ἀγάμων ἄνδρας ἰσαρίθμους, 
Ξ / \ \ / ¢ 
οἷς αὐτὰς συνήρμοττε κατὰ τοὺς πατρίους ἑκάστης 
ἐθισμούς, ἐπὶ κοινωνίᾳ πυρὸς καὶ ὕδατος ἐγγυῶν 
ε ‘ ‘ ~ > e ~ 
τοὺς γάμους, ws Kai μέχρι τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἐπι- 
΄ / 
τελοῦνται χρόνων. 
ΧΧΧΙ. Ταῦτα δὲ γενέσθαι τινὲς μὲν γράφουσι 
~ > ‘ ~ ς ’ὔ ~ 
κατὰ τὸν πρῶτον ἐνιαυτὸν τῆς Ῥωμύλου ἀρχῆς, 
= \ \ ͵, Δ ΄ 
Γναῖος δὲ Γέλλιος κατὰ τὸν τέταρτον" ὃ καὶ μᾶλλον 
, > ΄ / 6 
εἰκός. νέον γὰρ οἰκιζομένης πόλεως ἡγεμόνα πρὶν 
\ / Μ 
ἢ καταστήσασθαι τὴν πολιτείαν ἔργῳ τηλικούτῳ 
“- ” Ρ / ~ \ ς ~ 
ἐπιχειρεῖν οὐκ exer® λόγον. τῆς δὲ ἁρπαγῆς τὴν 
αἰτίαν οἱ μὲν εἰς σπάνιν γυναικῶν ἀναφέρουσιν, 
ς- ς» > > \ az ε δὲ \ θ ΄ 
οἱ δ᾽ εἰς ἀφορμὴν πολέμου. οἱ δὲ τὰ πιθανώτατα 
: 2 A / > A 
γράφοντες. ols Kaya συγκατεθέμην, ets TO συνάψαι 
7 ,, / > 
φιλότητα πρὸς τὰς πλησιοχώρους πόλεις ἀναγκαίαν. 
« 7 - ς 
τὴν δὲ τότε ὑπὸ ἱΡωμύλου 5 καθιερωθεῖσαν ἑορτὴν 
” ἣ > > A » Ῥ A ὃ / 
ἔτι καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ ἄγοντες ὠμαῖοι διετέλουν 
1 τρόπον A: τρόπων B, Jacoby. 


2 Biicheler: εἶχε O. 
ὃ ὑπὸ ῥωμύλου B: τῶ ῥωμύλω A. 


400 


BOOK II. 30, 5-31, 2 


their despair with the assurance that they had been 
seized, not out of wantonness, but for the purpose 
of marriage; for he pointed out that this was an 
ancient Greek custom! and that of all methods of 
contracting marriages for women it was the most 
illustrious, and he asked them to cherish those 
whom Fortune had given them for their husbands. 
Then counting them and finding their number to 
be six hundred and eighty-three, he chose an equal 
number of unmarried men to whom he united them 
according to the customs of each woman’s country, 
basing the marriages on a communion of fire and 
water, in the same manner as marriages are performed 
even down to our times. 

XXXI. Some state that these things happened 
in the first year of Romulus’ reign, but Gnaeus 
Gellius says it was in the fourth, which is more 
probable. For it is not likely that the head of a 
newly-built city would undertake such an enterprise 
before establishing its government. As regards the 
reason for the seizing of the virgins, some ascribe 
it to a scarcity of women, others to the seeking of a 
pretext for war; but those who give the most 
plausible account—and with them I agree—attribute 
it to the design of contracting an alliance with the 
neighbouring cities, founded on affinity. And the 
Romans even to my day continued to celebrate the 
festival then instituted by Romulus, calling it the 

1It is to be regretted that Dionysius did not see fit to 
cite some specific instances of this practice from the Greek 
world. But probably he merely inferred such an early 
custom from some of the marriage rites of a later day, such 


as the procedure of the Spartan bridegrooms described by 
Plutarch (Lycurg. 15). 
401 


VOL. I. 4 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Κωνσουάλια καλοῦντες, ἐν 7) βωμός τε ὑπόγειος 
ἱδρυμένος παρὰ τῷ μεγώτῳ τῶν ἱπποδρόμων 
περισκαφείσης τῆς γῆς θυσίαις τε καὶ ὑπερπύροις 
ἀπαρχαῖς γεραίρεται, καὶ δρόμος ἵππων ζευκτῶν τε 
καὶ ἀζεύκτων ἐπιτελεῖται. καλεῖται δὲ ὁ θεός, ᾧ 
a > > = ~ € » ¢€ / a > 
ταῦτ᾽ ἐπιτελοῦσι, K&voos ὑπὸ “Ρωμαίων, ὃν ἐξερ- 
μηνεύοντες εἰς τὴν ἡμετέραν γλῶτταν Ποσειδῶνα 
Σεισίχθονά φασιν εἶναί τινες καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ὑπογείῳ 
τετιμῆσθαι βωμῷ λέγουσιν, ὅτι τὴν γῆν ὁ θεὸς 
οὗτος ἔχει. ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ ἕτερον οἶδα λόγον ἀκούων, 
ὡς τῆς μὲν ἑορτῆς τῷ [Ποσειδῶνι ἀγομένης καὶ τοῦ 
δρόμου τῶν ἵππων" τούτῳ τῷ θεῷ γινομένου, τοῦ 
δὲ καταγείου βωμοῦ δαίμονι ἀρρήτῳ τινὶ βουλευ- 
μάτων κρυφίων ἡγεμόνι καὶ φύλακι κατασκευασθέν- 
΄“ ~ A > ~ ‘ > / 
tos ὕστερον - Ποσειδῶνι yap ἀφανῆ βωμὸν οὐδαμόθι 
γῆς οὐθ᾽ ὑφ᾽ “Ελλήνων οὔθ᾽ ὑπὸ βαρβάρων καθ- 
~ \ 3 3 \ 4 ” \ > - 
ιδρῦσθαι- τὸ δ᾽ ἀληθὲς ὅπως ἔχει χαλεπὸν εἰπεῖν. 
XXXII. Ὡς δὲ διεβοήθ τὰ περὶ τὴν ἁρπαγὴν 
ή ρ ρ΄ 
τῶν παρθένων καὶ τὰ περὶ τοὺς γάμους εἰς τὰς 
πλησιοχώρους πόλεις, ai μὲν αὐτὸ τὸ πραχθὲν πρὸς 
3 \ > / ¢ > > > - > / / 
ὀργὴν ἐλάμβανον, at δ᾽ ad’ ἧς ἐπράχθη διαθέσεως 


1 ἵππων Sylburg: ἱππέων Ο. 





1 ΤῊ 6 Consualia was in origin a harvest festival held in 
honour of Consus, an ancient Italic god of agriculture. 
His altar was kept covered with earth except at these 
festivals (cf. Plutarch, Rom. 14, 3), perhaps to commemo- 
rate an ancient practice of storing the garnered grain under- 
ground or else to symbolize the secret processes of nature 
in the production of crops. At the Consualia horses and 
mules were given a holiday and crowned with flowers, as 
we have already seen (i. 33, 2). Because of the races held 


402 


BOOK II. 31, 2-32, 1 


Consualia,! in the course of which a subterranean 
altar, erected near the Circus Maximus, is un- 
covered by the removal of the soil round about it 
and honoured with sacrifices and burnt-offerings of 
first-fruits and a course is run both by horses yoked 
to chariots and by single horses. The god to whom 
these honours are paid is called Consus by the 
Romans, being the same, according to some who 
render the name into our tongue, as Poseidon 
Seisichthon or the “ Earth-shaker”’; and they say 
that this god was honoured with a subterranean 
altar because he holds the earth.?. I know also from 
hearsay another tradition, to the effect that the 
festival is indeed celebrated in honour of Neptune 
and the horse-races are held in his honour, but 
that the subterranean altar was erected later to a 
certain divinity whose name may not be uttered, 
who presides over and is the guardian of hidden 
counsels ; for a secret altar has never been erected to 
Neptune, they say, in any part of the world by either 
Greeks or barbarians. But it is hard to say what 
the truth of the matter is. 

XXXII. When,? now, the report of the seizure of 
the virgins and of their marriage was spread among 
the neighbouring cities, some of these were incensed 
at the proceeding itself, though others, considering 


on his festival the god came to be identified with Poseidon 
Hippios. The name Consus is evidently derived from the 
verb condere (‘to store up ᾽᾽); but the Romans connected it 
with consilium and thought of him as a god of counsels 
and secret plans. 

? Or “ upholds the earth.”’ Compare his Greek epithet 
Γαιήοχος (“* Earth-upholding ’’). 

’ For chaps. 32-36 cf. Livy i. 10; 11, 1-5. 


403 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ > Δ / > ,ὔ 2 ͵ ͵ 
καὶ εἰς ὃ τέλος ἐχώρησεν ἀναλογιζόμεναι μετρίως 
αὐτὸ ἔφερον, κατέσκηψε δ᾽ οὖν ἀνὰ χρόνον εἰς 

͵ \ \ Rod ’ - A \ A 
πολέμους τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους εὐπετεῖς, ἕνα δὲ τὸν 

A / , Α ’ : ic / 
πρὸς Σαβίνους μέγαν καὶ χαλεπόν - οἷς ἅπασι τέλος 
ἐπηκολούθησεν εὐτυχές, ὥσπερ αὐτῷ τὰ μαντεύματα 

~ ~ mW 
προεθέσπισε πρὶν ἐπιχειρῆσαι τῷ ἔργῳ, πόνους μὲν 
καὶ κινδύνους μεγάλους προσημαίνοντα, τὰς δὲ 
τελευτὰς αὐτῶν ἔσεσθαι καλάς. ἦσαν δὲ αἱ πρῶται 

,ὔ Μ ~ \ > \ / / 
πόλεις ἄρξασαι τοῦ πρὸς αὐτὸν πολέμου Kawivy 
καὶ Ἄντεμνα καὶ Kpovotopepia, πρόφασιν μὲν 
ποιούμεναι τὴν ἁρπαγὴν τῶν παρθένων καὶ τὸ μὴ 

= ς.. 3 A sy ε δὲ > \ > 
λαβεῖν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν δίκας, ws de τἀληθὲς εἶχεν 
5 / ~ / \ Ε] / ~ e ͵ὔ ΕῚ 
ἀχθόμεναι τῇ κτίσει τε καὶ αὐξήσει τῆς “Ρώμης δι 
5. 7 A ͵ \ . > i ε 
ὀλίγου πολλῇ γενομένῃ καὶ οὐκ ἀξιοῦσαι περιιδεῖν 
- / Ὁ 
κοινὸν ἐπὶ τοῖς περιοίκοις ἅπασι κακὸν φυόμενον. 
͵7 A =z \ A = / “A > ,ὔὕ 
τέως μὲν οὖν πρὸς τὸ Σαβίνων ἔθνος ἀποστέλλουσαι 
> / \ ε ~ 
πρέσβεις ἐκείνους ἠξίουν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τοῦ πολέμου 
- > 4 ” 
παραλαβεῖν ἰσχύν τε μεγίστην ἔχοντας Kal χρήμασι 
πλεῖστον' δυναμένους ἄρχειν τε ἀξιοῦντας τῶν 
/ \ > > / ~ ΝΜ 
πλησιοχώρων καὶ οὐκ ἐλάχιστα τῶν ἄλλων περι- 
~ \ ¢ « 

υβρισμένους " τῶν γὰρ ἡρπασμένων αἱ πλείους ἦσαν 
ἐκείνων. 

ΧΧΧΠΙ. ᾿Επεὶ δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἐπέραινον ἀντικαθιστα- 
͵ - ~ \ ae ~ 
μένων αὐταῖς τῶν παρὰ τοῦ Ῥωμύλου πρεσβειῶν 
~ ” 
καὶ θεραπευουσῶν λόγοις τε καὶ ἔργοις TO ἔθνος, 
ἀχθόμεναι τῇ τριβῇ τοῦ χρόνου, μελλόντων ἀεὶ τῶν 
Σαβίνων καὶ ἀναβαλλομένων εἰς χρόνους μακροὺς 
1 πλεῖστον Cobet, πλεῖον Steph.*: πλείοσι Ο. 

404 


BOOK IT. 32, 1-33, 1 


the motive from which it sprang and the outcome to 
which it led. bore it with moderation; but, at any 
rate, in the course of time it occasioned several 
wars, of which the rest were of small consequence, 
but that against the Sabines was a great and difficult 
one. All these wars ended happily, as the oracles 
had foretold to Romulus before he undertook the 
task, indicating as they did that the difficulties 
and dangers would be great but that their outcome 
would be prosperous. The first cities that made 
war upon him were Caenina, Antemnae and Crus- 
tumerium. They put forward as a pretext the 
seizure of the virgins and their failure to receive 
satisfaction on their account; but the truth was 
that they were displeased at the founding of Rome 
and at its great and rapid increase and felt that they 
ought not to permit this city to grow up as a com- 
mon menace to all its neighbours’ For the time 
being, then, these cities were sending ambassadors 
to the Sabines, asking them to take the command of 
the war, since they possessed the greatest military 
strength and were most powerful by reason of their 
wealth and were laying claim to the rule over their 
neighbours and inasmuch as they had suffered from 
the Romans’ insolence quite as much as any of the 
rest; for the greater part of the virgins who had been 
seized belonged to them. 

XXXII. But when they found they were accom- 
plishing nothing, since the embassies from Romulus 
opposed them and courted the Sabine people both 
by their words and by their actions, they were 
vexed at the waste of time—for the Sabines were 
forever affecting delays and putting off to distant 


405 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


A ‘ ~ 
Τὴν περὶ τοῦ πολέμου βουλήν, αὐταὶ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰς 
» - «ς ~ ~ 
ἔγνωσαν τοῖς Ρωμαίοις πολεμεῖν, ἀποχρῆν οἰόμεναι 
\ > / ~ 
τὴν οἰκείαν δύναμιν, εἰ καθ᾽ ἕν αἱ τρεῖς γένοιντο, 
/ » 6 1 5A > tr > A / 
μίαν ἄρασθαι! πόλιν οὐ μεγάλην. ἐβουλεύσαντο 
\ ~ ~ > κι ” > a id 
μὲν ταῦτα, συνελθεῖν δ᾽ οὐκ ἔφθησαν εἰς ἕν ἅπασαι 
στρατόπεδον προεξαναστάντων προχειρότερον τῶν 
> ~ 
ex τῆς Καινίνης, οἵπερ καὶ μάλιστα ἐδόκουν τὸν 
πόλεμον ἐνάγειν. ἐξεστρατευμένων δὲ τούτων καὶ 
δῃούντων τὴν ὅμορον, ἐξαγαγὼν τὴν δύναμιν ὁ 
ς ΄, > 7 > » = ͵ 
Ῥωμύλος ἀφυλάκτοις οὖσιν ἔτι τοῖς πολεμίοις 
ἀπροσδοκήτως ἐπιτίθεται καὶ τοῦ τε χάρακος 
αὐτῶν ἀρτίως ἱδρυμένου γίνεται κύριος τοῖς τε 
φεύγουσιν εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἐκ ποδὸς ἑπόμενος, οὐδέπω 
τῶν ἔνδον πεπυσμένων τὴν περὶ τοὺς σφετέρους 
~ / 
συμφοράν, τεῖχός τε ἀφύλακτον εὑρὼν καὶ πύλας 
~ A 
ἀκλείστους αἱρεῖ τὴν πόλιν ἐξ ἐφόδου καὶ Tov βασι- 
Ada τῶν Κααινινιτῶν ὑπαντήσαντα σὺν καρτερᾷ 
A σ΄ 
χειρὶ μαχόμενος αὐτοχειρίᾳ κτείνει καὶ τὰ ὅπλα 
ἀφαιρεῖται. 
~ ¢ =~ 
XXXIV. Τοῦτον δὲ τὸν τρόπον ἁλούσης τῆς 
/ 1 int ~ \ ε / / 
πόλεως τὰ ὅπλα παραδοῦναι τοὺς ἁλόντας κελεύσας 
\ ~ > ς / Δ > / A a? ἢ 
Kal παῖδας εἰς ὁμηρείαν, οὗς ἐβούλετο, λαβὼν ἐπὶ 
> / \ ‘\ ~ 
τοὺς ‘Avreuvdtas ἐχώρει. γενόμενος δὲ Kal τῆς 
ΝΜ A 
ἐκείνων δυνάμεως ἐσκεδασμένης ἔτι κατὰ τὰς 
\ a ᾽ ? 27 ΄ Pes 318 
προνομὰς τῇ παρ᾽ ἐλπίδας ἐφόδῳ καθάπερ καὶ 
΄ \ c 
τῆς προτέρας ἐγκρατὴς καὶ τὰ αὐτὰ τοὺς ἁλόντας 
~ \ ay 7 
διαθεὶς ἀπῆγεν ἐπ᾽ οἴκου τὴν δύναμιν, ἄγων σκῦλά 
1 ἄρασθαι Cobet: αἱρεῖσθαι A, αἱρῆισθαι Ba, αἱρήσειν Bb, 
αἱρῆσαι R. 
406 


BOOK ITI. 33. 1-34, 1 


dates the deliberation concerning the war—and 
resolved to make war upon the Romans by them- 
selves alone, believing that their own strength, if the 
three cities joined forces, was sufficient to conquer 
one inconsiderable city. This was their plan; but 
they did not all assemble together promptly enough 
in one camp, since the Caeninenses, who seemed to be 
most eager in promoting the war. rashly set out ahead 
of the others. ‘When these men, then, had taken the 
field and were wasting the country that bordered 
on their own, Romulus led out bis army, and un- 
expectedly falling upon the enemy while they were as 
yet off their guard, he made himself master of their 
camp, which was but just completed. Then follow- 
ing close upon the heels of those who fled into the city, 
where the inhabitants had not as yet learned of the 
defeat of their forces, and finding the walls unguarded 
and the gates unbarred, he took the town by storm ; 
and when the king of the Caeninenses met him with 
a strong body of men, he fought with him, and 
slaying him with his own hands, stripped him of his 
arms. 

XXXIV. The town being taken in this manner, 
he ordered the prisoners to deliver up their arms, 
and taking such of their children for hostages as 
he thought fit, he marched against the Antemnates. 
And having conquered their army also, in the same 
manner as the other, by falling upon them un- 
expectedly while they were still dispersed in foraging, 
and having accorded the same treatment to the 
prisoners, he led his army home, carrying with him 


407 


ie) 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τε ἀπὸ τῶν πεπτωκότων' κατὰ THY μάχην Kal 
> / / θ a ‘ \ a / 
ἀκροθίνια λαφύρων θεοῖς, καὶ πολλὰς ἅμα τούτοις 
θυσίας ἐποιήσατο. τελευταῖος δὲ τῆς πομπῆς αὐ- 
> ~ \ > Ξε “- 
τὸς ἐπορεύετο ἐσθῆτα μὲν ἠμφιεσμένος ἁλουργῆ, 
δάφνῃ δὲ κατεστεμμένος τὰς κόμας καί, ἵνα τὸ 
, 547 ͵΄ t ΄, 
βασίλειον ἀξίωμα σώζῃ, τεθρίππῳ παρεμβεβηκώς. 
ἡ δ᾽ ἄλλη δύναμις αὐτῷ παρηκολούθει πεζῶν τε 
καὶ ἱππέων κεκοσμημένη κατὰ τέλη θεούς τε 
- > a \ ‘ ς 
ὑμνοῦσα πατρίοις woais καὶ τὸν ἡγεμόνα κυδαί- 
ε » ~ 
νουσα ποιήμασιν αὐτοσχεδίοις. οἱ δ᾽ ἐκ τῆς 
~ a 
πόλεως ὑπήντων αὐτοῖς ἅμα γυναιξί Te καὶ τέκνοις 
~ ¢ ~ ~ / 
map ἄμφω τὰ μέρη τῆς ὁδοῦ TH τε νίκῃ συνηδό- 
\ \ » «“ > / 
μενοι Kat τὴν ἄλλην ἅπασαν ἐνδεικνύμενοι φιλο- 
͵ ς A ~ | a κει > \ ͵ὔ 
φροσύνην. ὡς δὲ παρῆλθεν ἡ δύναμις εἰς τὴν πόλιν 
κρατῆρσί τε ἐπετύγχανεν οἴνῳ κεκραμένοις καὶ 
͵ ~ / / a \ 
τραπέζαις τροφῆς παντοίας γεμούσαις, al mapa τὰς 
~ ~ ww σ > ~ 
ἐπιφανεστάτας τῶν οἰκιῶν ἔκειντο, ἵνα ἐμφορεῖσθαι 
«4, ὦ τῇ ε \ Ss > / 
τοῖς Σ βουλομένοις ἧ. ἡ μὲν οὖν ἐπινίκιός τε Kat 
; \ \ 6 ͵ a A = ῬἭῬ Ὰ 
τροπαιοφόρος πομπὴ καὶ θυσία, ἣν καλοῦσι Ῥωμαῖοι 
/ = 
θρίαμβον, ὑπὸ Ῥωμύλου πρώτου κατασταθεῖσα 
͵, > ( > δὲ “ θ᾽ 4 a Bi λ λὴ 
τοιαύτη τις ἦν" ἐν δὲ τῷ καθ΄ ἡμᾶς βίῳ πολυτελὴς 
~ > 
γέγονε καὶ ἀλαζὼν εἰς πλούτου μᾶλλον ἐπίδειξιν ἢ 
~ ͵ \ a 
δόκησιν ἀρετῆς ἐπιτραγῳδουμένη καὶ καθ᾽ ἅπασαν 
atte > ͵ \ > ἀξ" > > \ δὲ 
ἰδέαν ἐκβέβηκε τὴν ἀρχαίαν εὐτέλειαν. μετὰ δὲ 
ι ἠεπτωκότων Biicheler, ἀποθανόντων or ἁλόντων Steph.?, 


ἀπολωλότων Reiske, πεσόντων Kiessling: ἀποίκων Ο. 
2 ἐμφορεῖσθαι τοῖς Biicheler: τοῖς ἐμφορεῖσθαι O. 


408 


BOOK IT. 34, 1-4 


the spoils of those who had been slain in battle 
and the choicest part of the booty as an offering 
to the gods; and he offered many sacrifices besides. 
Romulus himself came last in the procession, clad 
in a purple robe and wearing a crown of laurel 
upon his head, and, that he might maintain the 
royal dignity, he rode in a chariot drawn by four 
horses.1 The rest of the army, both foot and horse, 
followed, ranged in their several divisions, praising 
the gods in songs of their country and extolling 
their general in improvised verses. They were met 
by the citizens with their wives and children, who, 
ranging themselves on each side of the road, con- 
gratulated them upon their victory and expressed 
their welcome in every other way. When the army 
entered the city, they found mixing bowls filled to 
the brim with wine and tables loaded down with all 
sorts of viands, which were placed before the most 
distinguished houses in order that all who pleased 
might take their fill. Such was the victorious pro- 
cession, marked by the carrying of trophies and 
concluding with a sacrifice, which the Romans call 
a triumph, as it was first instituted by Romulus. 
But in our day the triumph has become a very 
costly and ostentatious pageant, being attended 
with a theatrical pomp that is designed rather as 
a display of wealth than as the approbation of 
valour, and it has departed in every respect from 
its ancient simplicity. After the procession and the 


? Plutarch (Romulus 16) corrects Dionysius on this point, 
claiming that the first Tarquin, or, according to some, 
Publicola, was the first to use a chariot in the triumphal 
procession. 


409 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τὴν πομπήν τε Kal θυσίαν νεὼν κατασκευάσας ὃ 
“Ῥωμύλος ἐπὶ τῆς κορυφῆς τοῦ Καπιτωλίου" Διός, 
ὃν ἐπικαλοῦσι “Ῥωμαῖοι Φερέτριον, οὐ μόγαν (ἔτι 
γὰρ αὐτοῦ σώζεται τὸ ἀρχαῖον ἴχνος ἐλάττονας ἢ 
πέντε ποδῶν καὶ δέκα τὰς μείζους πλευρὰς ἔχον), 
ἐν τούτῳ καθιέρωσε τὰ σκῦλα τοῦ ἱΚαινινιτῶν 
βασιλέως, ὃν αὐτοχειρίᾳ κατειργάσατο. τὸν δὲ 
Δία τὸν Φερέτριον, ᾧ τὰ ὅπλα ὁ “Ῥωμύλος 
ἀνέθηκεν, εἴτε βούλεταί τις Τροπαιοῦχον εἴτε 
Σικυλοφόρον καλεῖν ὡς ἀξιοῦσί τινες εἴθ᾽, ὅτι 
πάντων ὑπερέχει καὶ πᾶσαν ἐν κύκλῳ περιείληφε 
τὴν τῶν ὄντων φύσιν τε καὶ κίνησιν, “Ὑπερφερέτην, 
οὐχ ἁμαρτήσεται τῆς ἀληθείας. 

ΧΧΧΥ ‘Qs δ᾽ ἀπέδωκε τοῖς θεοῖς 6 βασιλεὺς 
is χαριστηρίους θυσίας τε καὶ ἀπαρχάς, πρὶν ἢ 
τῶν ἄλλων τι διαπράξασθαι βουλὴν ἐποιεῖτο περὶ 
τῶν κρατηθεισῶν πόλεων, ὅντινα χρηστέον αὐταῖς 
τρόπον, αὐτὸς ἣν ὑπελάμβανε κρατίστην εἶναι 
γνώμην πρῶτος ἀποδειξάμενος. ws δὲ πᾶσι τοῖς 
ἐν τῷ συνεδρίῳ παροῦσιν ἢ τε ἀσφάλεια τῶν 
βουλευμάτων τοῦ ἡγεμόνος ἤρεσκε καὶ ἡ λαμπρό- 
της τά τε ἄλλα ὅσα ἐξ αὐτῶν γενήσεται τῇ πόλει 
χρήσιμα οὐκ ἐν τῷ παραχρῆμα μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ 
εἰς ἅπαντα τὸν ἄλλον χρόνον ἐπῃνεῖτο, συνελθεῖν 
κελεύσας τὰς γυναῖκας ὅσαι τοῦ τε ᾿Αντεμνατῶν 
καὶ τοῦ Καινινιτῶν ἐτύγχανον οὖσαι γένους, ἡρπα- 
σμένα: δὲ ἅμα ταῖς ἄλλαις, ἐπεὶ δὲΞ συνῆλθον ὀλοφυρό- 
μεναί τε καὶ προκυλιόμεναι καὶ τὰς τῶν πατρίδων 


1 λόφου after Καπιτωλίου deleted by Kiessling. 
* ἐπεὶ δὲ Kiessling: ἐπειδὴ O. 


410 


BOOK II. 34, 4-35, 2 


sacrifice Romulus built a small temple on the summit 
of the Capitoline hill to Jupiter whom the Romans 
call Feretrius; indeed, the ancient traces of it still 
remain, of which the longest sides are less than fifteen 
feet. In this temple he consecrated the spoils of 
the king of the Caeninenses, whom he had slain with 
his own hand. As for Jupiter Feretrius, to whom 
Romulus dedicated these arms, one will not err from 
the truth whether one wishes to call him Tropaiouchos, 
or Skylophoros, as some will have it. or, since he 
excels all things and comprehends universal nature 
and motion, Hyperpheretés.' 

XXXYV. After the king had offered to the gods 
the sacrifices of thanksgiving and the first-fruits of 
victory, before entering upon any other business. 
he assembled the senate to deliberate with them in 
what manner the conquered cities should be treated, 
and he himself first delivered the opinion he thought 
the best. When all the senators who were present 
had approved of the counsels of their chief as both 
safe and brilliant and had praised all the other ad- 
vantages that were likely to accrue from them to the 
commonwealth, not only for the moment but for 
all future time, he gave command for the assembling 
of all the women belonging to the race of the 
Antemnates and of the Caeninenses who had been 
seized with the rest. And when they had assembled. 
lamenting, throwing themselves at his feet and 
bewailing the calamities of their native cities, he 

1 These three Greek words mean, respectively, “‘ Bearer 
(or Receiver) of Trophies,’ ὁ Bearer of Spoils,” and 
““Supreme.’’ Dionysius obviously derived Feretrius from 
ferre (‘to bear’’); but modern scholars agree with Pro- 
pertius (iv. 10, 46) in connecting it with fertre (‘‘ to 
strike ᾽᾽). 

411 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ > A ~ ~ μ᾿ 
ἀνακλαίουσαι τύχας, ἐπισχεῖν τῶν ὀδυρμῶν καὶ 
σιωπῆσαι κελεύσας ἔλεξε: “Τοῖς μὲν ὑμετέροις 

/ \ > ~ \ σ - / ¢ ~ 
πατράσι καὶ ἀδελφοῖς καὶ ὅλαις ταῖς πόλεσιν ὑμῶν 
iA \ \ > / ~ “ / 
ἅπαντα τὰ δεινὰ ὀφείλεται παθεῖν, ὅτι πόλεμον 
3 \ / Μ > - Μ \ > 7 
ἀντὶ φιλίας οὔτε ἀναγκαῖον οὔτε καλὸν ἀνείλοντο᾽ 
ἡμεῖς δὲ πολλῶν ἕνεκεν ἐγνώκαμεν μετρίᾳ χρή- 

A ~ 
σασθαι γνώμῃ πρὸς αὐτοὺς θεῶν τε νέμεσιν ὑφορώ- 
μενοι τὴν ἅπασι τοῖς ὑπερόγκοις ἐνισταμένην καὶ 
2 /, / / ” / ~ ~ 
ἀνθρώπων φθόνον δεδιότες ἔλεόν τε κοινῶν κακῶν 
οὐ μικρὸν ἔρανον εἶναι νομίζοντες, ὡς κἂν αὐτοί 
ποτε τοῦ Tap ἑτέρων δεηθέντες, ὑμῖν τε οὐ μεμπταῖς 
ὑπαρχούσαις μέχρι τοῦδε περὶ τοὺς ἑαυτῶν ἄνδρας 
οὐ μικρὰν οἰόμενοι ταύτην ἔσεσθαι τιμὴν καὶ χάριν. 
παρίεμεν οὖν αὐτοῖς τὴν ἁμαρτάδα ταύτην ἀζήμιον 

~ > ~ 

καὶ οὔτε ἐλευθερίαν οὔτε κτῆσιν οὔτ᾽ ἄλλο τῶν 
> ~ > \ \ / ς ~ > / 

ἀγαθῶν οὐδὲν τοὺς πολίτας ὑμῶν ἀφαιρούμεθα. 

- > ~ al 

ἐφίεμεν δὲ τοῖς Te μένειν γλιχομένοις ἐκεῖ καὶ τοῖς 

μετενέγκασθαι βουλομένοις τὰς οἰκήσεις ἀκίνδυνόν 

τε καὶ ἀμεταμέλητον τὴν αἵρεσιν. τοῦ δὲ μηδὲν 

~ > ~ ~ 

ἔτι αὐτοὺς ἐπεξαμαρτεῖν μηδ᾽ εὑρεθῆναί τι χρῆμα, 

\ ~ 

ὃ ποιήσει τὰς πόλεις διαλύσασθαι τὴν πρὸς ἡμᾶς 

> \ 

φιλίαν, φάρμακον ἡγούμεθα κράτιστον εἶναι πρὸς 
\ \ / 

εὐδοξίαν τε Kal πρὸς ἀσφάλειαν τὸ αὐτὸ χρήσιμον 

7 > / ~ c 

ἀμφοτέροις, εἰ ποιήσαιμεν ἀποικίας τῆς “Ῥώμης 

τὰς πόλεις καὶ συνοίκους αὐταῖς πέμψαιμεν αὐτόθεν 

τοὺς ἱκανούς. ἄπιτε οὖν ἀγαθὴν ἔχουσαι διάνοιαν 

3 \ ~ 

καὶ διπλασίως ἢ πρότερον ἀσπάζεσθε καὶ τιμᾶτε 

\ ” e 9... Φ ~ [4 ~ > / ‘ 

τοὺς ἄνδρας, ὑφ᾽ ὧν γονεῖς Te ὑμῶν ἐσώθησαν καὶ 


1 κἂν Kiessling: καὶ O. 


412 


BOOK II. 35. 2-4 


commanded them to cease their lamentations and 
be silent, then spoke to them as follows: “ Your 
fathers and brothers and your entire cities deserve 
to suffer every severity for having preferred to our 
friendship a war that was neither necessary nor 
honourable. We, however, have resolved for many 
reasons to treat them with moderation; for.we not 
only fear the vengeance of the gods, which ever 
threatens the arrogant, and dread the ill-will of men, 
but we also are persuaded that mercy contributes 
not a little to alleviate the common ills of man- 
kind, and we realize that we ourselves may one 
day stand in need of that of others. And we be- 
lieve that to you, whose behaviour towards your 
husbands has thus far been blameless, this will be 
no small honour and favour. We suffer this offence 
of theirs, therefore, to go unpunished and take from 
your fellow citizens neither their liberty nor their 
possessions nor any other advantages they enjoy ; 
and both to those who desire to remain there and 
to those who wish to change their abode we grant 
full liberty to make their choice, not only without 
danger but without fear of repenting. But, to prevent 
their ever repeating their fault or the finding of any 
occasion to induce their cities to break off their 
alliance with us, the best means, we consider, and 
that which will at the same time conduce to the 
reputation and security of both, is for us to make 
those cities colonies of Rome and to send a sufficient 
number of our own people from here to inhabit them 
jointly with your fellow citizens. Depart, therefore, 
with good courage; and redouble your love and 
regard for your husbands, to whom your parents 


413 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> 
5 ἀδελφοὶ καὶ πατρίδες ἐλεύθεραι ἀφίενται. ai μὲν 
δὴ γυναῖκες ὡς ταῦτ᾽ ἤκουσαν περιχαρεῖς γενόμεναι 
\ \ Q 7 « > e ~ > - / 
καὶ πολλὰ δάκρυα ὑφ᾽ ἡδονῆς ἀφεῖσαι μετέστησαν 
ἐκ τῆς ἀγορᾶς, ὁ δὲ “Ῥωμύλος τριακοσίους μὲν 
ἄνδρας εἰς ἑκατέραν ἀποίκους ἀπέστειλεν, οἷς 
ἔδοσαν αἱ πόλεις τρίτην κατακληρουχῆσαι μοῖραν 
6 τῆς ἑαυτῶν γῆς. Kawuitdv δὲ καὶ Avreyvatav 
\ » 
τοὺς βουλομένους μεταθέσθαι τὴν οἴκησιν εἰς 
ς ε 
Ρώμην γυναιξὶν ἅμα καὶ τέκνοις μετήγαγον κλή- 
ρους τε τοὺς ἑαυτῶν ἔχοντας καὶ χρήματα φερο- 
μένους ὅσα ἐκέκτηντο, οὗς εὐθὺς εἰς φυλὰς καὶ 
φράτρας ὁ βασιλεὺς κατέγραψε," τρισχιλίων οὐκ 
ἐλάττους ὄντας. ὥστε τοὺς σύμπαντας ἑξακισχιλίους 
πεζοὺς “Ῥωμαίοις τότε πρῶτον ἐκ καταλόγου γε- 
/ / \ \ 7" 7 / > 
7 véoba. Καινίνη μὲν δὴ καὶ ᾿ἄντεμνα πόλεις οὐκ 
Μ / » \ ¢ / > a 
donor γένος ἔχουσαι τὸ ᾿Ελληνικόν, ‘ABoptyives 
γὰρ αὐτὰς ἀφελόμενοι τοὺς Σικελοὺς κατέσχον, 
~ ~ > 
Οἰνώτρων μοῖρα τῶν ἐξ Ἀρκαδίας ἀφικομένων, ws 
εἴρηταί μοι πρότερον, μετὰ τόνδε τὸν πόλεμον 
ἀποικίαι “Ρωμαίων γεγένηντο. 
~ / 
XXXVI. ‘O δὲ Ῥωμύλος ταῦτα διαπραξάμενος 
A ‘ 
ἐπὶ Kpovotopepivous ἐξάγει τὴν στρατιὰν παρεσκευ- 
΄ a“ > 
ασμένους ἄμεινον τῶν προτέρων" ovs ἐκ παρα- 
7 ” 
τάξεώς TE καὶ τειχομαχίας παραστησάμενος ἄνδρας 
~ Ἁ ” 
ἀγαθοὺς κατὰ τὸν ἀγῶνα γενομένους οὐδὲν ἔτι 
A \ ᾽ / > \ \ / > / 
διαθεῖναι κακὸν ἠξίωσεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ταύτην ἐποίησεν 
σ A / 
ἄποικον Ρωμαίων τὴν πόλιν ὥσπερ Tas προτέρας. 
> Ἢ \ ͵ "Ar ~ > / 2 
2 ἦν δὲ τὸ Κρουστομέριον βανῶν ἀπόκτισις 


1 Biicheler: κατέγραφε Ο. 
* ἀπόκτισις ABa: ἀποίκησις Bb. 


414 


BOOK ITI. 35, 5-36, 2 


and brothers owe their preservation and your coun- 
tries their liberty.”. The women, hearing this, were 
greatly pleased, and shedding many tears of joy, 
left the Forum ; but Romulus sent a colony of three 
hundred men into each city, to whom these cities 
gave a third part of their lands to be divided among 
them by lot. And those of the Caeninenses and 
Antemnates who desired to remove to Rome they 
brought thither together with their wives and 
children, permitting them to retain their allotments 
of land and to take with them all their possessions ; 
and the king immediately enrolled them, numbering 
not less than three thousand, in the tribes and the 
curiae, so that the Romans had then for the first 
time six thousand foot in all upon the register. Thus 
Caenina and Antemnae, no inconsiderable cities. 
whose inhabitants were of Greek origin (for the 
Aborigines had taken the cities from the Sicels and 
occupied them, these Aborigines being, as 1 said 
before, part of those Oenotrians who had come out 
of Arcadia *), after this war became Roman colonies. 

XXXVI. Romulus, having attended to these 
matters, led out his army against the Crustumerians, 
who were better prepared than the armies of the 
other cities had been. And after he had reduced 
them both in a pitched battle and in an assault upon 
their city, although they had shown great bravery 
in the struggle, he did not think fit to punish them 
any further, but made this city also a Roman colony 
like the two former. Crustumerium was a colony of 


aye 1.9. 
415 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ / ~ «ς / > ~ , 
πολλοῖς πρότερον τῆς “Ῥώμης ἀποσταλεῖσα χρόνοις. 
/ \ ~ / ~ / / 
διαγγελλούσης δὲ τῆς φήμης πολλαῖς πόλεσι τήν τε 
κατὰ πολέμους γενναιότητα τοῦ ἡγεμόνος καὶ THY 
πρὸς τοὺς κρατηθέντας ἐπιείκειαν ἄνδρες τε αὐτῷ 
/ \ \ > \ ’ > 7 ἴ 
προσετίθεντο πολλοὶ καὶ ἀγαθοὶ δυνάμεις ἀξιοχρέους 
πανοικίᾳ μετανισταμένας ἐπαγόμενοι, ὧν ἐφ᾽ ἑνὸς 
ἡγεμό ἐκ Τ ας ἐλθό ὃ Καίλιος 6: 
ἡγεμόνος ἐκ Τυρρηνίας ἐλθόντος, ᾧ Καίλιος ὄνομα 
ἦν, τῶν λόφων τις, ἐν ᾧ καθιδρύθη, Καίλιος εἰς 
/ / - \ / a / 
τόδε χρόνου καλεῖται: Kal πόλεις ὅλαι παρεδίδοσαν 
¢ A > \ ~ / > / ‘ > 4 
ἑαυτὰς ἀπὸ τῆς εδυλλίνων ἀρξάμεναι Kai ἐγίνοντο 
Ρωμαίων ἀποικίαι. Σαβῖνοι δὲ ταῦτα ὁρῶντες 
» \ » > 7 > , > ¢ 9 
ἤχθοντο καὶ δι᾽ αἰτίας ἀλλήλους εἶχον, ὅτι οὐκ 
\ ¢ / > \ > / > > 
ἀρχομένην τὴν Ρωμαίων ἰσχὺν ἐκώλυσαν, ἀλλ 
ἐπὶ μέγα προηκούσῃ συμφέρεσθαι ἔμελλον, ἐδόκει 
τε αὐτοῖς ἐπανορθώσασθαι τὴν προτέραν ἄγνοιαν 
ἀξιολόγου δυνάμεως ἀποστολῇ. καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο 
ἀγορὰν ποιησάμενοι σύμπαντες ἐν τῇ μεγίστῃ τε 
πόλει καὶ πλεῖστον ἀξίωμα ἐχούσῃ τοῦ ἔθνους, 7 
Κύρις ὄνομα ἦν, ψῆφον ὑπὲρ τοῦ πολέμου διήνεγκαν 
ἀποδείξαντες ἡγεμόνα τῆς στρατιᾶς Τῖτον, ὃς ἐπε- 
καλεῖτο Τάτιος, βασιλέα Κυριτῶν. Σαβῖνοι μὲν 
δὴ ταῦτα βουλευσάμενοι καὶ διαλυθέντες κατὰ τὰς 
πόλεις τὰ πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον ηὐτρεπίζοντο, ὡς εἰς 
/ > \ \ e / ~ \ > / 
νέωτα ἐπὶ τὴν “Pony πολλῇ χειρὶ ἐλάσοντες. 
« 
XXXVI. Ἔν τούτῳ δὲ καὶ ὁ Ῥωμύλος ἀντι- 
παρεσκευάζετο τὰ κράτιστα, ὡς ἀμυνούμενος ἄνδρας 
Ἁ / > / ~ \ ΄ A - 
τὰ πολέμια ἀλκίμους, τοῦ μὲν ]]αλατίου τὸ τεῖχος 
ς > / > ~ ” e / > , 
ws ἀσφαλέστερον εἶναι τοῖς ἔνδον ὑψηλοτέροις ἐρύ- 
μασιν ἐγείρων, τοὺς δὲ παρακειμένους αὐτῷ λόφους 
1 τὴν Ambrosch: om. O, Jacoby. 
416 


BOOK II. 36, 2-37, 1 


the Albans sent out many years before the founding 
of Rome. The fame of the general’s valour in war 
and of his clemency to the conquered being spread 
through many cities, many brave men joined him, 
bringing with them considerable bodies of troops, 
who migrated with their whole families. From one 
of these leaders, who came from Tyrrhenia and whose 
name was Caelius, one of the hills, on which he 
settled, is to this day called the Caelian. Whole 
cities also submitted to him, beginning with Medullia, 
and became Roman colonies. But the Sabines, 
seeing these things, were displeased and blamed one 
another for not having crushed the power of the 
Romans while it was in its infancy, instead of which 
they were now to contend with it when it was greatly 
increased. They determined, therefore, to make 
amends for their former mistake by sending out 
an army of respectable size. And soon afterwards, 
assembling a general council in the greatest and 
most famous city of the nation, called Cures. they 
voted for the war and appointed Titus, surnamed 
Tatius, the king of that city, to be their general. 
After the Sabines had come to this decision. the 
assembly broke up and all returned home to their 
several cities, where they busied themselves with 
their preparations for the war, planning to advance 

on Rome with a great army the following year. 
XXXVII. In the meantime Romulus also was 
making the best preparations he could in his turn, 
realizing that he was to defend himself against 
a warlike people. With this in view, he raised 
the wall of the Palatine hill by building higher 
ramparts upon it as a further security to the in- 
habitants, and fortified the adjacent hills—the 
417 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


tov τε Avdevtivov καὶ τὸν Καπιτωλῖνον viv λεγό- 
μενον ἀποταφρεύων καὶ γχαρακώμασι καρτεροῖς 
τ 

περιλαμβάνων, ἐν οἷς τὰ ποίμνια καὶ τοὺς γεωργοὺς 

αὐλίζεσθαι τὰς νύκτας ἐπέταξεν ἐχεγγύῳ φρουρᾷ 

5 ΧΕ ΟΣ PRPS 

/ 

καταλαβὼν ἑκάτερον, Kal εἴ τι ἄλλο χωρίον ἀσφά- 

λειαν αὐτοῖς παρέξειν ἔμελλεν ἀποταφρεύων καὶ 

περισταυρῶν καὶ διὰ φυλακῆς ἔχων. ἧκε δὲ αὐτῷ 

-~ \ > 

Τυρρηνῶν ἐπικουρίαν ἱκανὴν ἄγων ἐκ LoAwviov 
/ > A 2 / \ \ / 9 / 

πόλεως ἀνὴρ δραστήριος Kat τὰ πολέμια" διαφανής, 

7 » , > A ~ 7 \ 

Δοκόμων ὄνομα, φίλος οὐ πρὸ πολλοῦ γεγονώς, Kat 

3, 2 ~ a” a“ «ς / » > ~ 

παρ᾽ Αλβανῶν ἄνδρες, ovs ὁ πάππος ἔπεμψεν αὐτῷ, 

συχνοὶ στρατιῶταί τε καὶ ὑπηρέται καὶ τεχνῖται 

~ ~ Ὁ 

πολεμικῶν ἔργων, σῖτός τε καὶ ὅπλα καὶ ὅσα τού- 
Ξ ς ~ ¢ - > a 

τοις πρόσφορα ἣν ἱκανῶς ὅ ἅπαντα ἐπεχορηγεῖτο. 

" 3 ~ 4 ες 
ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἐν ἑτοίμῳ τὰ πρὸς τὸν ἀγῶνα ἦν ἑκατέροις, 
΄ , > / « 

ἔαρος ἀρχομένου μέλλοντες ἐξάγειν οἱ Σαβῖνοι τὰς 
- / ~ e 

δυνάμεις ἔγνωσαν ἀποστεῖλαι πρεσβείαν πρῶτον ws 
- > / > 

τοὺς πολεμίους τάς τε γυναῖκας ἀξιώσουσαν ἀπο- 

= ~ > / - 

λαβεῖν καὶ δίκας ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν αἰτήσουσαν τῆς 
~ ~ > ‘ 

ἁρπαγῆς, wa δὴ δι᾿ ἀνάγκην δοκῶσιν ἀνειληφέναι 
~ \ \ 

τὸν πόλεμον οὐ τυγχάνοντες τῶν δικαίων, καὶ τοὺς 
, » ΣΤ 5: ‘P a pS. > a 

κήρυκας ἔπεμπον ἐπὶ ταῦτα. ὠμύλου δὲ ἀξιοῦν- 

΄ > \ 39> > - > 4 
Tos Tas μὲν γυναῖκας, ἐπειδὴ οὐδ᾽ αὐταῖς ἀκούσαις 
1 Οὐολσινίου O. Miller, Οὐετολωνίου Cluver, Ποπλωνίου 
Casaubon. 


Σ ἔργα after πολέμια deleted by Ambrosch. 
3 ἱκανῶς Sintenis: καὶ οἷς AB. 


418 


BOOK II. 37, 1-4 


Aventine and the one now called the Capitoline— 
with ditches and strong palisades, and upon these 
hills he ordered the husbandmen with their flocks 
to pass the nights, securing each of them by a suffi. 
cient garrison; and likewise any other place that 
promised to afford them security he fortified with 
ditches and palisades and kept under guard. In the 
meantime there came to him a man of action and 
reputation for military achievements, named Lucumo. 
lately become his friend, who brought with him 
from the city of Solonium! a considerable body of 
Tyrrhenian mercenaries. There came to him also 
from the Albans, sent by his grandfather, a goodly 
number of soldiers with their attendants, and witb 
them artificers for making engines of war; these 
men were adequately supplied with provisions. 
arms and all necessary equipment. When every: 
thing was ready for the war on both sides, the Sabines. 
who planned to take the field at the beginning oi 
spring, resolved first to send an embassy to the 
enemy both to ask for the return of the women and 
to demand satisfaction for their seizure, just so 
that they might seem to have undertaken the war 
from necessity when they failed to get justice. 
and they were sending the heralds for this purpose. 
Romulus, however, asked that the women, since 
they themselves were not unwilling to live with 


1 Solonium was an ancient city about twelve miles from 
Rome, near the Ostian Way. It disappeared at an early 
date, but its name survived in the Solonius ager. The 
statement οἱ Dionysius is confirmed by Propertius iv. 1. 
31, where the latest editions. following the Neapolitan 
MS., read hinc Tities Ramnesque wri Luceresque Solon’ 
(instead of colon). 


419 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ὁ μετὰ τῶν ἀνδρῶν Bios ἦν, ἐᾶν παρὰ Tots yeyaun- 
κόσι μένειν, εἰ δέ τινος ἄλλου δέονται, λαμβάνειν 
ε \ 7, ͵ \ A » Ε \ 
ws παρὰ φίλων, πολέμου δὲ μὴ ἄρχειν, οὐδενὶ 
τῶν ἀξιουμένων ὑπακούσαντες ἐξῆγον τὴν στρατιὰν 
πεζοὺς μὲν ἄγοντες πεντακισχιλίους ἐπὶ δύο μυριά- 
¢ A \ 3\ 7 ὃ ‘ / Ss \ ‘ 
aw, ἱππεῖς δὲ ὀλίγου δέοντας χιλίων. ἦν δὲ καὶ 
¢ 1 » Ῥ / ὃ / > λ \ ~ te / 
ἡ τῶν “Ρωμαίων δύναμις οὐ πολὺ τῆς Σαβίνων 
ἀποδέουσα * δύο μὲν αἱ τῶν πεζῶν μυριάδες, ὀκτα- 
κόσιοι δ᾽ ἱππεῖς, καὶ προεκάθητο τῆς πόλεως διχῇ 
‘ ~ > ~ ͵ 
διῃρημένη, μία μὲν μοῖρα τὸν ᾿Εσκυλῖνον κατέχουσα 
; Ἢ a 5 > \ ¢ ‘P. 5A > ων" δὲ \ 
λόφον, ἐφ᾽ ἧς αὐτὸς ὁ Pwpvdos ἦν, ἑτέρα δὲ Tov 
Μ \ 
Kupinov οὔπω ὃ tavtnv* ἔχοντα τὴν προσηγορίαν, 
=> Ss ς 
ἧς ὁ Τυρρηνὸς ἦν Μοκόμων ἡγεμών. 
\ - 
ΧΧΧΥΠΙ. Mabey δὲ τὴν παρασκευὴν αὐτῶν 
Τά 3 ς ~ yi / λ \ \ > ΄ὔ 
ἅτιος ὃ ὁ τῶν Σαβίνων βασιλεὺς νυκτὸς ἀναστήσας 
τὸν στρατὸν ἦγε διὰ τῆς χώρας οὐδὲν σινόμενος ὃ 
~ ~ A 
τῶν κατὰ TOUS ἀγροὺς καὶ πρὶν ἀνατεῖλαι τὸν 
- “ \ ~ ΄ \ ~ ,ὔ 
ἥλιον μεταξὺ τοῦ τε Κυρινίου καὶ τοῦ Καπιτωλίου 
/ > ~ / \ / if ~ \ > - 
τίθησιν ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ τὸν χάρακα. ὁρῶν δὲ ἀσφαλεῖ 
~ \ “ 
πάντα φυλακῇ κατεχόμενα πρὸς τῶν πολεμίων, 
᾽ > 
σφίσι δὲ οὐδὲν χωρίον ἀπολειπόμενον ὀχυρὸν εἰς 
πολλὴν ἐνέπιπτεν ἀπορίαν οὐκ ἔχων ὅ τι χρήσεται 
τῇ τριβῇ τοῦ χρόνου. ἀμηχανοῦντι δὲ αὐτῷ παρά- 
δοξος εὐτυχία γίνεται παραδοθέντος τοῦ κρατίστου 
τῶν ὀχυρωμάτων κατὰ τοιάνδε τινὰ συντυχίαν. 
« ~ 
παρεξιόντας γὰρ τὴν pilav τοῦ Καπιτωλίου τοὺς 
Σαβίνους εἰς ἐπίσκεψιν, εἴ τι μέρος εὑρεθείη τοῦ 
17 added by Ambrosch. *Cobet: δέουσα O. 
3 οὔπω Ambrosch: οὔπω τὲ A, οὕπωτε B. 
*Sylburg: αὐτὴν O. 
5 Steph.: τάτις A τῖτος B (and so elsewhere). 


420 


BOOK II. 37, 4-38, 2 


their husbands, should be permitted to remain with 
them; but he offered to grant the Sabines anything 
else they desired, provided they asked it as from 
friends and did not begin war. Thereupon the 
others, agreeing to none of his proposals, led out 
their army, which consisted of twenty-five thousand 
foot and almost a thousand horse. And the Roman 
army was not much smaller than that of the Sabines, 
the foot amounting to twenty thousand and the 
horse to eight hundred ; it was encamped before the 
city in two divisions, one of them, under Romulus 
himself, being posted on the Esquiline hill, and the 
other, commanded by Lucumo, the Tyrrhenian, on 
the Quirinal, which did not as yet have that name. 

XXXVIII. Tatius,’ the king of the Sabines, being 
informed of their preparations, broke camp in the 
night and led his army through the country, without 
doing any damage to the property in the fields, and 
before sunrise encamped on the plain that lies be- 
tween the Quirinal and Capitoline hills. But ob- 
serving all the posts to be securely guarded by the 
enemy and no strong position left for his army, he 
fell into great perplexity, not knowing what use to 
make of the enforced delay. While he was thus at 
his wit’s end, he met with an unexpected piece of good 
fortune, the strongest of the fortresses being delivered 
up to him in the following circumstances. It seems 
that, while the Sabines were passing by the foot of the 
Capitoline to view the place and see whether any part 


1 For chaps. 38-44 cf. Livy i. 11, 6-12, 10. 





® σινόμενος Bb: οἰνώμενος Ba, οἰόμενος A. 


421 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


λόφου κλοπῇ ληφθῆναι δυνατὸν ἢ Bia, παρθένος τις 
~ A 
ἀπὸ τοῦ μετεώρου κατεσκόπει, θυγάτηρ ἀνδρὸς 
ἐπιφανοῦς, ᾧ προσέκειτο ἡ τοῦ χωρίου φυλακή, 
1» / »Μ \ > 7 e \ D / / \ 
ἅρπεια ὄνομα: Kal αὐτήν, ws μὲν Φάβιός τε Kat 
Κίψκιος γράφουσιν, ἔρως εἰσέρχεται τῶν ψελλίων," 
ἃ περὶ τοῖς ἀριστεροῖς βραχίοσιν ἐφόρουν, καὶ τῶν 
> « 
δακτυλίων: χρυσοφόροι γὰρ ἦσαν οἱ LaPivor τότε 
καὶ Τυρρηνῶν οὐχ ἧττον ἁβροδίαιτοι ὡς δὲ Πείσων 
Λεύκιος ὁ τιμητικὸς ἱστορεῖ, καλοῦ πράγματος ἐπι- 
θυμία, γυμνοὺς τῶν σκεπαστηρίων ὅπλων παρα- 
δυῦναι τοῖς πολίταις τοὺς πολεμίους. ὁπότερον δὲ 
τούτων ἀληθέστερόν ἐστιν ἐκ τῶν ὕστερον γενομένων 
ἔξεστιν εἰκάζειν. πέμψασα δ᾽ οὖν τῶν θεραπαινίδων 
\ ‘ A Δ ὃ ‘ " A > ͵ 
τινὰ διὰ πυλίδος, ἣν οὐδεὶς ἔμαθεν ἀνοιγομένην, 
~ > ~ ~ 
ἠξίου τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Σαβίνων ἐλθεῖν αὑτῇ diya 
~ Μ > λό e > / ὃ Ὰ / ‘ 
τῶν ἄλλων eis λόγους, ὡς ἐκείνῳ διαλεξομένη περὶ 
πράγματος ἀναγκαίου καὶ μεγάλου. δεξαμένου δὲ 
~ / \ λό > >). ὃ ὃ / ; ‘ 
τοῦ Τατίου τὸν λόγον κατ᾽ ἐλπίδα προδοσίας καὶ 
/ / 
συνελθόντος εἰς τὸν ἀποδειχθέντα τόπον, προελ- 
~ > 
θοῦσα εἰς ἐφικτὸν ἡ παρθένος ἐξεληλυθέναι μὲν 
\ > ~ / \ ‘ e ~ Μ 
νυκτὸς ἐκ τοῦ φρουρίου τὸν πατέρα αὑτῆς ἔφη 
-. \ / 
χρείας τινὸς ἕνεκα, Tas δὲ κλεῖς αὐτὴ φυλάττειν 
~ ~ ~ \ y+ 4 
τῶν πυλῶν καὶ παραδώσειν αὐτοῖς TO ἔρυμα νυκτὸς 
͵ - ’ ~ A 
ἀφικομένοις μισθὸν τῆς προδοσίας λαβοῦσα τὰ 
~ - / 
φορήματα τῶν Σαβίνων, a περὶ τοῖς εὐωνύμοις 


1 ψελλίων Bb: ψαλίων ABa. 
422 


BOOK II. 38, 2-4 


of the hill could be taken either by surprise or 
by force, they were observed from above by a 
maiden whose name was Tarpeia, the daughter of a 
distinguished man who had been entrusted with the 
guarding of the place. This maiden, as both Fabius 
and Cincius relate, conceived a desire for the bracelets 
which the men wore on their left arms and for their 
rings; for at that time the Sabines wore ornaments 
of gold and were no less luxurious in their habits 
than the Tyrrhenians.!_ But according to the ac- 
count given by Lucius Piso, the ex-censor, she was 
inspired by the desire of performing a noble deed, 
namely, to deprive the enemy of their defensive 
arms and thus deliver them up to her fellow citizens. 
Which of these accounts is the truer may be con- 
jectured by what happened afterwards. This girl, 
therefore, sending out one of her maids by a little 
gate which was not known to be open, desired the 
king of the Sabines to come and confer with her in 
private, as if she had an affair of necessity and im- 
portance to communicate to him. Tatius, in the 
hope of having the place betrayed to him, accepted 
the proposal and came to the place appointed; and 
the maiden, approaching within speaking distance, 
informed him that her father had gone out of the 
fortress during the night on some business, but that 
she had the keys of the gates, and if they came in 
the night, she would deliver up the place to them 
upon condition that they gave her as a reward for 
her treachery the things which all the Sabines wore 


1It need hardly be pointed out how inconsistent this 
description of the Sabines is with the traditional view of 
their character as given below at the end of chapter 49. 


423 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


= > -“ / b) - A ~ 
5 εἶχον ἅπαντες βραχίοσιν. εὐδοκοῦντος δὲ τοῦ 
Τατίου λαβοῦσα τὰς πίστεις δι᾿ ὅρκων παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ 

᾿ Β. ὁ γᾷ ζω ~ \ / \ ε , 
καὶ αὐτὴ δοῦσα τοῦ μὴ ψεύδεσθαι τὰς ὁμολογίας 

/ e / xy> A ” \ / > ~ 
τόπον τε ὁρίσασα, ἐφ᾽ dv ἔδει τοὺς Σαβίνους ἐλθεῖν, 
τὸν éyupwratov! καὶ νυκτὸς ὥραν τὴν ἀφυλακτο- 
τάτην ἀπήει καὶ τοὺς ἔνδον ἔλαθε. 

XXXIX. Μέχρι μὲν δὴ τούτων συμφέρονται 
πάντες οἱ Ρωμαίων συγγραφεῖς, ἐν δὲ τοῖς ὕστερον 
λεγομένοις οὐχ ὁμολογοῦσι. [{]είσων γὰρ 6 τιμη- 

= > 
TLKOS, οὗ καὶ πρότερον ἐμνήσθην, ἄγγελόν φησιν 
ὑπὸ τῆς Ταρπείας ἀποσταλῆναι νύκτωρ ἐκ τοῦ 
χωρίου δηλώσοντα τῷ ᾿ωμύλῳ τὰς γενομένας τῇ 

/ A \ / e / σ , 
κόρῃ πρὸς τοὺς Σαβίνους ὁμολογίας, ὅτι μέλλοι 
τὰ σκεπαστήρια Tap * αὐτῶν αἰτεῖν ὅπλα διὰ τῆς 
κοινότητος τῶν ὁμολογιῶν παρακρουσαμένη, δύνα- 

λῶν ἢ 
μίν τε ἀξιώσοντα πέμπειν ἐπὶ τὸ φρούριον ἑτέραν 
~ / 
νυκτός, ὡς αὐτῷ στρατηλάτῃ παραληψομένην 3 τοὺς 
~ 4 \ A 
πολεμίους γυμνοὺς τῶν ὅπλων: τὸν δὲ ἄγγελον 
e / ~ 
αὐτομολήσαντα πρὸς τὸν ἡγεμόνα τῶν Σαβίνων 
~ ~ / 
κατήγορον γενέσθαι τῶν τῆς Ταρπείας βουλευμά- 
/ / / 
των. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Pafidv τε Kat Κίχκιον οὐδὲν 
Ss > \ / A 
τοιοῦτο γεγονέναι λέγουσιν, ἀλλὰ φυλάξαι τὴν κόρην 
~ \ ~ / 
διαβεβαιοῦνται τὰς περὶ τῆς προδοσίας συνθήκας. 
\ > tea Ὁ / ¢ / 4 A 
2 τὰ δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἅπαντες πάλιν ὁμοίως γράφουσι. φασὶ 
~ / κ 
γὰρ ὅτι παραγενομένου σὺν τῷ κρατίστῳ τῆς 
~ / ~ / ~ / , 
στρατιᾶς μέρει τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν Σαβίνων φυλάτ- 
ε / a \ 
τουσα τὰς ὑποσχέσεις ἡ Τάρπεια τοῖς μὲν πολεμίοις 


1 τὸν ἐχυρώτατον Kiessling: τῶν ἐχυρωτάτων ΑΒ. 
2 παρ᾽ B: om. R. 


424 


BOOK II. 38, 5-39, 2 


on their left arms. And when Tatius consented to 
this, she received his sworn pledge for the faithful 
performance of the agreement and gave him hers. 
Then having appointed, as the place to which the 
Sabines were to repair, the strongest part of the 
fortress, and the most unguarded hour of the night 
as the time for the enterprise, she returned without 
being observed by those inside. 

XXXIX. So far all the Roman historians agree, 
but not in what follows. For Piso, the ex-censor, 
whom I mentioned before, says that a messenger 
was sent out of the place by Tarpeia in the night to 
inform Romulus of the agreement she had made 
with the Sabines, in consequence of which she pro- 
posed, by taking advantage of the ambiguity of 
the expression in that agreement, to demand their 
defensive arms, and asking him at the same time to 
send a reinforcement to the fortress that night, 
so that the enemy together with their commander, 
being deprived of their arms, might be taken 
prisoners; but the messenger, he says, deserted 
to the Sabine commander and acquainted him with 
the designs of Tarpeia. Nevertheless, Fabius and 
Cincius say that no such thing occurred, but they 
insist that the girl kept her treacherous compact. 
In what follows, however, all are once more in 
agreement. For they say that upon the arrival 
of the king of the Sabines with the flower of his 
army, Tarpeia, keeping her promise, opened to the 


3 παραληψομένην Reiske (and Lapus in his translation): 
παραληψόμενον O, Jacoby. 


425 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἀνέῳξε τὴν συγκειμένην πυλίδα, τοὺς δ᾽ ἐν τῷ 
χωρίῳ φύλακας ἀναστήσασα διὰ ταχέων σώζειν 
ἑαυτοὺς ἠξίου καθ᾽ ἑτέρας ἐξόδους τοῖς πολεμίοις 
ἀφανεῖς, ὡς κατεχόντων ἤδη τῶν Σαβίνων τὸ 
φρούριον: διαφυγόντων δὲ τούτων τοὺς μὲν La- 
βίνους ἀνεῳγμένας εὑρόντας τὰς πύλας κατασχεῖν 
τὸ φρούριον ἔ ἔρημον. τῶν φυλάκων, τὴν δὲ Τάρπειαν 
ὡς τὰ παρ᾽ ἑαυτῆς ὅσα συνέθετο παρεσχημένην 
ἀξιοῦν τοὺς μισθοὺς τῆς προδοσίας κατὰ τοὺς 
ὅρκους ἀπολαβεῖν. 

XL. "ἔπειτα πάλιν ὁ μὲν Π]είσων φησὶ τῶν 
Σαβίνων τὸν χρυσὸν ἑτοίμων ὄντων διδόναι τῇ κόρῃ 
τὸν περὶ τοῖς ἀριστεροῖς βραχίοσι τὴν Τάρπειαν οὐ 
τὸν κόσμον ἀλλὰ τοὺς θυρεοὺς παρ᾽ αὐτῶν αἰτεῖν. 
Τατίῳ δὲ θυμόν τε εἰσελθεῖν ἐπὶ τῇ ἐξαπάτῃ καὶ 
λογισμὸν τοῦ μὴ παραβῆναι τὰς ὁμολογίας. δόξαι 
δ᾽ οὖν αὐτῷ δοῦναι μὲν τὰ ὅπλα, ὥσπερ ἡ παῖς 
ἠξίωσε, ποιῆσαι δ᾽ ὅπως αὐτοῖς μηδὲν λαβοῦσα 
χρήσεται, καὶ αὐτίκα διατεινάμενον ὡς μάλιστα 
ἰσχύος εἶχε ῥῖψαι τὸν θυρεὸν κατὰ τῆς κόρης καὶ 
τοῖς ἄλλοις παρακελεύσασθαι ταὐτὸ ποιεῖν. οὕτω 
δὴ βαλλομένην πάντοθεν τὴν Τάρπειαν ὑπὸ πλήθους 
τε καὶ ἰσχύος τῶν πληγῶν πεσεῖν καὶ περισωρευ- 
θεῖσαν ὑπὸ τῶν θυρεῶν ἀποθανεῖν. ot δὲ περὶ τὸν 
Φάβιον ἐπὶ τοῖς Σαβίνοις ποιοῦσι τὴν τῶν ὁμολογιῶν 
ἀπάτην: δέον γὰρ αὐτοὺς τὸν χρυσόν, ὥσπερ ἡ 
Τάρπεια ἠξίου, κατὰ τὰς ὁμολογίας ἀποδιδόναι, 
χαλεπαίνοντας ἐπὶ τῷ μεγέθει τοῦ μισθοῦ τὰ 
σκεπαστήρια κατ᾽ αὐτῆς βαλεῖν, ὡς ταῦτα ὅτε 


426 


BOOK II. 39, 2-40, 2 


enemy the gate agreed upon, and rousing the garri- 
son, urged them to save themselves speedily by 
other exits unknown to the enemy, as if the Sabines 
were already masters of the place; that after the 
flight of the garrison the Sabines, finding the gates 
open, possessed themselves of the stronghold, now 
stripped of its guards, and that Tarpeia, alleging 
that she had kept her part of the agreement, in- 
sisted upon receiving the reward of her treachery 
according to the oaths. 

XL. Here again Piso says that, when the Sabines 
were ready to give the girl the gold they wore on 
their left arms, Tarpeia demanded of them their 
shields and not their ornaments. But Tatius re- 
sented the imposition and at the same time thought 
of an expedient by which he might not violate the 
agreement. Accordingly, he decided to give her 
the arms as the girl demanded, but to contrive that 
she should make no use of them; and immediately 
poising his shield, he hurled it at her with all his 
might, and ordered the rest to do the same; and 
thus Tarpeia, being pelted from all sides, fell under 
the number and force of the blows and died, over- 
whelmed by the shields. But Fabius attributes this 
fraud in the performance of the agreement to the 
Sabines ; for they, being obliged by the agreement 
to give her the gold as she demanded, were angered 
at the magnitude of the reward and hurled their 
shields at her as if they had engaged themselves 





1 Meineke: χρήσηται O. ; * Sylburg: τοῦτο O. 
3 βαλεῖν Reiske: βάλλειν O. 


427 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


M” >] ~ ὃ 4 ες / » δὲ τ 
ὥμνυσαν αὐτῇ δώσειν ὑπεσχημένους. ἔοικε δὲ τὰ 
~ A ᾽ὔ 
μετὰ ταῦτα γενόμενα τὴν Ileiowvos ἀληθεστέραν 
ποιεῖν ἀπόφασιν. τάφου τε γὰρ ἔνθα ἔπεσεν 
ἠξίωται τὸν ἱερώτατον τῆς πόλεως κατέχουσα λό- 
ae ~ 
gov, καὶ χοὰς αὐτῇ “Ῥωμαῖοι καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐνιαυτὸν 
ἐπιτελοῦσι (λέγω δὲ ἃ Πείσων γράφει), ὧν οὐδενὸς 
~ \ ~ 
εἰκὸς αὐτήν, εἰ προδιδοῦσα THY πατρίδα Tots πολε- 
μίοις ἀπέθανεν, οὔτε παρὰ τῶν προδοθέντων οὔτε 
παρὰ τῶν ἀποκτεινάντων τυχεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ εἴ τι 
λείψανον αὐτῆς ἦν τοῦ σώματος ἀνασκαφὲν ἔξω 
ῥιφῆναι σὺν χρόνῳ φόβου τε καὶ ἀποτροπῆς 2 ἕνεκα 
~ / A ΄σ ~ 5 > « A ‘A 
τῶν μελλόντων τὰ ὅμοια δρᾶν. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν 
τούτων κρινέτω τις ὡς βούλεται. 
ς 
‘O δὲ Τάτιος καὶ οἱ Σαβῖνοι φρουρίου 
~ 4 A A ~ ~ 
γενόμενοι καρτεροῦ κύριοι Kal τὰ πλεῖστα τῆς 
“Ρωμαίων ἀποσκευῆς ἀμοχθεὶ παρειληφότες ἐκ τοῦ 
5 ~ » \ / / \ A 
ἀσφαλοῦς ἤδη τὸν πόλεμον διέφερον. πολλαὶ μὲν 
> ~ / 
οὖν αὐτῶν ἐγίνοντο Kai διὰ πολλὰς προφάσεις 
/ > / » > / ~ 7 
παρεστρατοπεδευκότων ἀλλήλοις δι᾽ ὀλίγου πεῖραί 
τε καὶ συμπλοκαὶ οὔτε κατορθώματα μεγάλα 
ἑκατέρῳ φέρουσαι τῶν στρατευμάτων οὔτε 3 σφάλ- 
» > - 
ματα, μέγισται δ᾽ ἐκ παρατάξεως ὅλαις ταῖς 
/, A > 7 4 \ ‘\ , 
δυνάμεσι πρὸς ἀλλήλας μάχαι διτταὶ καὶ φόνος 
« A ~ 
ἑκατέρων πολύς. ἑλκομένου yap * τοῦ χρόνου 
γνώμην ἀμφότεροι τὴν αὐτὴν ἔσχον ὁλοσχερεῖ 
κρῖναι τὸν ἀγῶνα μάχῃ, καὶ προελθόντες εἰς τὸ 
μεταξὺ τῶν στρατοπέδων χωρίον ἡγεμόνες τε 
1 ἀπόφασιν L. Dindorf: ἀπόκρισιν O; om. Jacoby. 
2 ἀποτροπῆς Steph.: προτροπῆς O. 
8 οὔτε Reudler: οὔτε τὰ O. 
4 γὰρ Ambrosch, δὴ Kiessling, Jacoby : δὲ O. 
428 


BOOK II. 40, 2-41, 2 


by their oaths to give her these. But what followed 
gives the greater appearance of truth to the state- 
ment of Piso. For she was honoured with a monu- 
ment in the place where she fell and lies buried on 
the most sacred hill of the city and the Romans 
every year perform libations to her (I relate what 
Piso writes); whereas, if she had died in betraying 
her country to the enemy, it is not to be supposed 
that she would have received any of these honours, 
either from those whom she had betrayed or from 
those who had slain her, but, if there had been any 
remains of her body, they would in the course of 
time have been dug up and cast out of the city, in 
order to warn and deter others from committing 
the like crimes. But let everyone judge of these 
matters as he pleases. 

XLI. As for Tatius and the Sabines, having 
become masters of a strong fortress and having 
without any trouble taken the greatest part of the 
Romans’ baggage, they carried on the war thereafter 
in safety. And as the armies lay encamped at a 
short distance from each other and many occasions 
offered, there were many essays and skirmishes, 
which were not attended with any great advantages 
or losses to either side, and there were also two very 
severe pitched battles, in which all the forces were 
opposed to each other and there was great slaughter 
on both sides. For, as the time dragged along, they 
both came to the same resolution, namely, to decide 
the issue by a general engagement. Whereupon 
leaders of both armies, who were masters of the art 


429 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


» ‘ λέ \ ~ AAD > (ὃ 
ἄριστοι τὰ πολέμια καὶ στρατιῶται πολλῶν ἐθάδες 
ἀγώνων ἄξια λόγου ἔργα ἀπεδείκνυντο ἐπιόντες 
>] > / \ \ > / ὃ / ‘ > 
71 ἀλλήλοις Kat τοὺς ἐπιόντας δεχόμενοι καὶ ἐξ 
a > ε 
ὑποστροφῆς εἰς ἴσον αὖθις καθιστάμενοι. οἱ δ᾽ 
~ ς ~ \ 
ἐπὶ τῶν ἐρυμάτων ἑστῶτες ἰσορρόπου θεαταὶ 
~ / ~ 
ἀγῶνος καὶ θαμινὰ ἑκατέρωσε μεταπίπτοντος τῷ 
~ ~ ? 
μὲν κατορθοῦντι τῶν σφετέρων ἐπικελεύσει τε Kal 
~ > 
παιανισμῷ πολλὴν ἐποίουν τὴν εἰς τὸ εὔψυχον 
ἐπίδοσιν, τῷ δὲ κάμνοντι καὶ διωκομένῳ δεήσεις 
τε καὶ οἰμωγὰς προϊέμενοι κωλυταὶ τοῦ εἰς τέλος 
> / > / ς > - > / ] ΄ὔ 
ἀνάνδρου ἐγίνοντο: ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἀμφοτέρων ἠναγκάζοντο 
3 
Kal παρὰ δύναμιν ὑπομένειν τὰ δεινά. ἐκείνην μὲν 
οὖν τὴν ἡμέραν οὕτω διενέγκαντες ἀγχωμάλως τὴν 
/ 
μάχην, σκότους ὄντος ἤδη, ἄσμενοι εἰς τοὺς οἰκείους 
ἑκάτεροι χάρακας ἀπηλλάσσοντο. 
- > ~ 
XLII. Ταῖς δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἡμέραις ταφὰς ποιησάμενοι 
τῶν νεκρῶν καὶ τοὺς κεκμηκότας ὑπὸ τραυμάτων 
/ 
ἀνακτησάμενοι δυνάμεις τε παρασκευάσαντες ἄλλας, 
> \ v> ΄ > «ς 
ἐπειδὴ ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς αὖθις ἑτέραν συνάψαι μάχην, 
΄- / 
εἰς TO αὐτὸ τῷ προτέρῳ χωρίον συνελθόντες ἄχρι 
> > ~ / c 
νυκτὸς ἐμάχοντο. ἐν ταύτῃ 3 τῇ μάχῃ Ῥωμαίων 
A 5 
ἀμφοτέροις ἐπικρατούντων τοῖς κέρασιν (εἶχε δὲ 
~ ε΄ Ἁ e / > \ 6 ἃ / ~ 
τοῦ δεξιοῦ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν αὐτὸς ὁ “Ῥωμύλος, τοῦ 
δὲ ἀριστεροῦ Λοκόμων ὁ Τυρρηνός), τοῦ δὲ μέσου 
,ὔ \ 
μηδέπω κρίσιν ἔχοντος, ὁ κωλύσας τὴν εἰς τέλος 
- = / / 
τῶν Σαβίνων ἧτταν καὶ εἰς ἀντίπαλα καταστήσας 
΄ “ FF A > 
αὖθις τὰ λειπόμενα τοῖς νικῶσιν els ἀνὴρ ἐγένετο 
ε 
Μέττιος" Κούρτιος ὄνομα ῥώμην τε σώματος 


1 χ᾽ added by Kiessling. 
430 


BOOK II. 41, 2-42, 2 


of war, as well as common soldiers, trained in many 
engagements, advanced into the plain that lay 
between the two camps and performed memorable 
feats both in attacking and receiving the enemy as 
well as in rallying and renewing the fight on equal 
terms. Those who from the ramparts were spec- 
tators of this doubtful battle, which, often varying, 
favoured each side in turn, when their own men had 
the advantage, inspired them with fresh courage 
by their exhortations and songs of victory, and when 
they were hard pressed and pursued, prevented 
them by their prayers and lamentations from 
proving utter cowards; and thanks to these shouts 
of encouragement and entreaty the combatants 
were compelled to endure the perils of the struggle 
even beyond their strength. And so, after they had 
thus carried on the contest all that day without a 
decision, darkness now coming on, they both gladly 
retired to their own camps. 

XLII. But on the following days they buried their 
dead, took care of the wounded and reinforced their 
armies ; then, resolving to engage in another battle, 
they met again in the same plain as before and 
fought till night. In this battle, when the Romans 
had the advantage on both wings (the right was 
commanded by Romulus himself and the left by 
Lucumo, the Tyrrhenian) but in the centre the 
battle remained as yet undecided, one man prevented 
the utter defeat of the Sabines and rallied their 
wavering forces to renew the struggle with the 
victors. This man, whose name was Mettius Curtius, 





* Kiessling: αὐτῇ O. 
3 Kiessling: μέττος A, μέστος (1) B. 


431 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


πολὺς | καὶ κατὰ χεῖρα γενναῖος, μάλιστα δ᾽ ἐπὶ 
τῷ μηδένα ὀκνεῖν φόβον ἢ κίνδυνον εὐδοκιμῶν. 
οὗτος δ᾽ ἐτάχθη μὲν ἡγεῖσθαι τῶν κατὰ μέσην 
ἀγωνιζομένων τὴν φάλαγγα καὶ τοὺς ἀντιτετα- 
γμένους ἐνίκα, βουληθεὶς δὲ καὶ τὰ κέρατα τῶν 
Σαβίνων μοχθοῦντα ἤδη καὶ ἐξωθούμενα εἰς τὸ 
ἴσον καταστῆσαι,Σ παρακελευσάμενος τοῖς ἀμφ᾽ 
αὑτὸν ἐδίωκε τοὺς φεύγοντας τῶν πολεμίων ἐσκε- 
δασμένους καὶ μέχρι τῶν πυλῶν αὐτοὺς ἤλασεν, 
ὥστε ἠναγκάσθη καταλιπὼν ἡμιτελῆ τὴν νίκην 6 
“Ῥωμύλος ἐπιστρέψαι τε καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ νικῶντα τῶν 
πολεμίων ὥσασθαι μέρη. τὸ μὲν δὴ κάμνον τῶν 
Σαβίνων μέρος ἐν τῷ ἴσῳ πάλιν ἦν ἀπελθούσης 
τῆς μετὰ Ρωμύλου δυνάμεως, ὁ δὲ κίνδυνος ἅπας 
περὶ τὸν Κούρτιον καὶ τοὺς σὺν ἐκείνῳ νικῶντας 
ἐγεγόνει. χρόνον μὲν οὖν τινα ot Σαβῖνοι δεξά- 
μενοι τοὺς “Ρωμαίους λαμπρῶς ἠγωνίσαντο, ἔπειτα 
πολλῶν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς συνιόντων ἐνέκλινάν τε καὶ 
διέσωζον ἑαυτοὺς ἐπὶ τὸν χάρακα, πολλὴν τοῦ 
Κουρτίου παρέχοντος αὐτοῖς εἰς τὸ μὴ διώκεσθαι 
τεταραγμένως ὃ ἀλλὰ βάδην ἀποχωρεῖν ἀσφάλειαν. 
αὐτὸς γὰρ εἱστήκει μαχόμενος καὶ τὸν “Ῥωμύλον 
ἐπιόντα ἐδέχετο, γίνεταί τε τῶν ἡγεμόνων αὐτῶν 
συμπεσόντων ἀλλήλοις μέγας καὶ καλὸς ἀγών. 
ἔξαιμος δὲ ὧν ἤδη καὶ καταβελὴς ὁ Κούρτιος 
ὕὑπήει κατ᾽ ὀλίγον, καὶ αὐτὸν ἐκ τῶν κατόπιν 
1 ἀνὴρ after πολὺς deleted by Kiessling. 
2 Sylburg: καταστῆνα: O. 


432 


BOOK II. 42, 2-5 


was of great physical strength and courageous in 
action, but he was famous especially for his contempt 
of all fear and danger. He had been appointed to 
command those fighting in the centre of the line and 
was victorious over those who opposed him; but 
wishing to restore the battle in the wings also, where 
the Sabine troops were by now in difficulties and 
being forced back, he encouraged those about him, 
and pursuing such of the enemy’s forces as were 
fleeing and scattered, he drove them back to the 
gates ὩΣ the city. This obliged Romulus to leave the 
victory but half completed and to return and make 
a drive against the victorious troops of the enemy. 
Upon the departure of Romulus with his forces 
those of the Sabines who had been in trouble were 
once more upon equal terms with their opponents, 
and the whole danger was now centred round Curtius 
and his victorious troops. For some time the 
Sabines received the onset of the Romans and 
fought brilliantly, but when large numbers joined 
in attacking them, they gave way and began to 
seek safety in their camp, Curtius amply securing 
their retreat, so that they were not driven back 
in disorder, but retired without precipitation. For 
he himself stood his ground fighting and awaited 
Romulus as he approached; and there ensued 
a great and glorious engagement between the leaders 
themselves as they fell upon each other. But at last 
Curtius, having received many wounds and lost much 
blood, retired by degrees till he came to a deep lake 





3 Sylburg: τεταραγμένοις O. 
4 ἐδέχετο Bb: δέχεται ABa. 


433 
VOL. I. Q 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ὑπεδέχετο λίμνη βαθεῖα, ἣν περιελθεῖν μὲν χαλεπὸν 
ἦν περικεχυμένων πανταχόθεν τῶν πολεμίων, διελ- 
θ ~ A e / 5 ᾽ὔ / Δ \ / / 
εῖν δὲ ὑπό τε ἰλύος πλήθους, ἣν τὰ πέριξ τέλματα 
εἶχε, καὶ βάθους ὕδατος τοῦ κατὰ μέσην αὐτὴν 
συνεστῶτος ἄπορον. ταύτῃ πλησιάσας ἔρριψεν 
ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὸ νᾶμα σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις, καὶ 6 ὀῬΡωμύλος 
ὡς αὐτίκα δὴ τ᾿ ἀνδρὸς ἐν τῇ λίμνῃ διαφθαρη- 
σομένου (καὶ ἅ ἅμα" ἀδύνατον ἦν κατὰ τέλματός τε 
αὐτὸν καὶ du ὕδατος πολλοῦ διώκειν) ἐπὶ τοὺς 
ἄλλους Σαβίνους τρέπεται: 6 δὲ Κούρτιος πολλὰ 
μοχθήσας σὺν χρόνῳ σώζεταί τε ἐκ τῆς λίμνης τὰ 
ὅπλα ἔχων καὶ εἰς τὸν χάρακα ἀπάγεται. οὗτος 
¢ / > / \ ” A > > 
ὁ τόπος ἀνακέχωσται μὲν ἤδη, καλεῖται δ᾽ ἐξ 
ἐκείνου τοῦ πάθους Κούρτιος λάκκος, ἐν μέσῳ 
μάλιστα ὧν τῆς “Ῥωμαίων ἀγορᾶς. 
XLII. ὩΡωμύλος δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους διώκων ἐγγὺς 
/ ~ / \ \ > ὃ ΝΜ 
γενόμενος τοῦ Καπιτωλίου καὶ πολλὰς ἐλπίδας ἔχων 
e a 
αἱρήσειν τὸ φρούριον ἄλλοις τε πολλοῖς τραύμασι 
\ νῷν AS ue , \ 
καταπονηθεὶς καὶ δὴ καὶ λίθου πληγῇ ἐξαισίῳ κατὰ 
κροτάφου ἐνεχθέντος ἐκ τῶν ἄνωθεν καρωθείς 5 
αἴρεταΐ τε πρὸς τῶν παρόντων ἡμιθανὴς καὶ εἰς τὸ 
τεῖχος ἀποφέρεται. τοῖς δὲ “Ῥωμαίοις δέος ἐμ- 
πίπτει τὸν ἡγεμόνα οὐκέτι ὁρῶσι, καὶ τρέπεται τὸ 
δεξιὸν κέρας εἰς φυγήν: οἱ δ᾽ ἐν τῷ εὐωνύμῳ 
ταχθέντες ἅμα τῷ “οκόμωνι τέως μὲν ἀντεῖχον 
ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος ἀναθαρρυνόμενοι, λαμπροτάτου 
τὰ πολέμια ἀνδρὸς καὶ πλεῖστα ἔργα κατὰ τοῦτον 
τὸν πόλεμον ἀποδειξαμένου: ἐπεὶ δὲ κἀκεῖνος 
Vee BS eae Sick γα 
2 Naber: κακωθείς O, Jacoby. 


434 


BOOK II. 42, 5-43, 2 


in his rear which it was difficult for him to make his 
way round, his enemies being massed on all sides of 
it, and impossible to pass through by reason of the 
quantity of mud on the marshy shore surrounding 
it and the depth of water that stood in the middle. 
When he came to the lake, he threw himself into 
the water, armed as he was, and Romulus, supposing 
that he would immediately perish in the lake,— 
moreover, it was not possible to pursue him through 
so much mud and water,—turned upon the rest 
of the Sabines. But Curtius with great difficulty 
got safely out of the lake after a time without losing 
his arms and was led away to the camp. This 
place is now filled up, but it is called from this 
incident the Lacus Curtius, being about in the middle 
of the Roman Forum.! 

XLIII. Romulus, while pursuing the others, had 
drawn near the Capitoline and had great hopes of 
capturing the stronghold, but being weakened by many 
other wounds and stunned by a severe blow from a 
stone which was hurled from the heights and hit him 
on the temple, he was taken up half dead by those 
about him and carried inside the walls. When the 
Romans no longer saw their leader, they were seized 
with fear and the right wing turned to flight; but 
the troops that were posted on the left with Lucumo 
stood their ground for some time, encouraged by 
their leader, a man most famous for his warlike 
prowess and who had performed many exploits 
during the course of this war. But when he in his 


1 Cf. Livy i. 13, 5. 
435 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> \ A ~ ~ / ~ ͵ὔ 
ἐλαθεὶς διὰ τῶν πλευρῶν σαυνίῳ τῆς δυνάμεως 
ε / v 0.9 9 \ / \ \ 
ὑπολιπούσης ἔπεσεν οὐδ᾽ αὐτοὶ διέμειναν, φυγὴ δὲ 
~ ~ / ~ 
μετὰ τοῦτο πάντων αὐτῶν ἐγίνετο, Kat ot Σαβῖνοι 
, 207 » = , » \ 
τεθαρρηκότες ἐδίωκον ἄχρι τῆς πόλεως. ἤδη δὲ 
πλησιάζοντες ταῖς πύλαις ἀπηλαύνοντο τῆς νεό- 
A > “- Lf 
τητος ἐπεξελθούσης αὐτοῖς ἀκραιφνοῦς, ἧ τὰ τείχη 
/ ¢ \ > , \ ae ͵7 
φυλάττειν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπέτρεψε, καὶ τοῦ Ῥωμύλου, 
> ~ / > 
ῥᾷον yap ἤδη εἶχεν ἐκ τοῦ Tpavpatos,! ἐκβοηθήσαν- 
Η =o , > , A 
Tos ws εἶχε τάχους, ἐγίνετό TE ἀγχίστροφος ἡ τοῦ 
= \ \ , \ ? 
ἀγῶνος τύχη Kat πολλὴν ἔχουσα τὴν ἐπὶ θάτερα 
«ς 
μεταβολήν. οἱ μέν γε φεύγοντες ὡς τὸν ἡγεμόνα 
~ / > 
ἐκ τοῦ ἀπροσδοκήτου φανέντα εἶδον ἀναλαβόντες 
~ > 
ἑαυτοὺς ἐκ τοῦ προτέρου δέους εἰς τάξιν καθίσταντο 
A e ~ a 
Kal οὐκέτι ἀνεβάλλοντο μὴ οὐχ ὁμόσε τοῖς ἐχθροῖς 
- / 
χωρεῖν: ot δὲ τέως κατείργοντες αὐτοὺς Kal μηδε- 
\ S \ 
μίαν οἰόμενοι μηχανὴν εἶναι TO μὴ οὐ κατὰ κράτος 
ΕῚ A 2 \ / GAG > δὲ \ > ὃ / 
av7nv? τὴν πόλιν ἁλῶναι, ἐπειδὴ TO αἰφνίδιόν τε 
καὶ παράδοξον ἐθεάσαντο τῆς μεταβολῆς, περὶ 
σωτηρίας αὐτοὶ τῆς ἑαυτῶν ἐσκόπουν. ἦν δὲ αὐ- 
- / 
τοῖς οὐκ ὃ εὐπετὴς ἡ πρὸς TOV χάρακα ἀναχώρησις 
> 4 ε ~ / \ ὃ \ ir ¢ ~ 
καθ᾽. ὑψηλοῦ τε χωρίου Kat διὰ κοίλης ὁδοῦ 
~ ¢ 
διωκομένοις, Kal πολὺς αὐτῶν ὁ φόνος > ἐν Ταύτῃ 
“ ~ > / 
γίνεται τῇ τροπῇ. ἐκείνην μὲν οὖν τὴν ἡμέραν 
οὕτως ἀγχωμάλως ἀγωνισάμενοι καὶ εἰς τύχας 
παραλόγους ἀμφότεροι καταστάντες ἡλίου περὶ 
chains ὄντος ἤδη διεκρίθησαν. 
* ῥᾷον γὰρ ἤδη εἶχεν ἐκ τοῦ τραύματος Kiessling » ῥᾷον yap ἤδη 
ἐκ τοῦ ) τραύματος εἶχεν Sylburg : ῥᾷον γὰρ εἶχε τοῦ τραύματος B, 
ῥᾷων ἦν γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ τραύματος A. 


τε ᾽ αὐτὴν Kiessling: αὐτῶν Β, τὴν πόλιν αὐτῶν R. 
8 οὐκ added by Casaubon. 


4360 


BOOK II. 43, 2-5 


turn was pierced through the side with a javelin and 
fell through weakness, they also gave way; and there- 
upon the whole Roman army was in flight, and the 
Sabines, taking courage, pursued them up to the 
city. But as they were already drawing near the 
gates they were repulsed, when the youths whom 
the king had appointed to guard the walls sallied 
out against them with their forces fresh; and 
when Romulus, too, who by this time was in some 
degree recovered of his wound, came out to their 
assistance with all possible speed, the fortune of the 
battle quickly turned and veered strongly to the 
other side. For those who were fleeing recovered 
themselves from their late fear on the unexpected 
appearance of their leader, and reforming their lines, 
no longer hesitated to come to blows with the enemy ; 
while the latter, who but now had been driving the 
fugitives into the city and thought there was nothing 
that could prevent them from ‘taking the city itself 
by storm, when they saw this sudden and unexpected 
change, took thought for their own safety. But 
they found it no easy matter to retreat to their 
camp, pursued as they were down from a height and 
through a hollow way, and in this rout they sustained 
heavy losses. And so, after they had thus fought 
that day without a decision and both had met with 
unexpected turns of fortune, the sun now being near 
his setting, they parted. 





4 καθ᾽ Casaubon, ἀπὸ Kiessling: ἀπὸ καθ᾽ R, azo... B. 
5 πολὺς αὐτῶν φόνος Ambrosch, πολὺς αὐτῶν ὁ φόνος Jacoby 
(in note), ov πολὺς αὐτῶν φόνος Reiske, ὁ πολὺς αὐτῶν φόνος O. 


437 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


XLIV. Ταῖς δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἡμέραις of te Σαβῖνοι ἐν 
βουλῇ ἐγίνοντο πότερον ἀπάξουσιν ᾿ ἐπ᾽ οἴκου τὰς 
δυνάμεις, ὅσα δύνανται τῆς χώρας τῶν πολεμίων 
κακώσαντες, ἢ προσμεταπέμψονται 2 στρατιὰν ἕτέ- 
ραν οἴκοθεν καὶ προσμενοῦσι ὃ λιπαροῦντες ἕως τὸ 
κάλλιστον ἐπιθήσουσι τῷ πολέμῳ τέλος. πονηρὸν 
δὲ αὐτοῖς καὶ τὸ ἀπιέναι μετ᾽ αἰσχύνης τῆς ἀπράκτου 
ἀναχωρήσεως ἐφαίνετο εἶναι καὶ τὸ μένειν οὐδενός 
σφισι χωροῦντος κατ᾽ ἐλπίδα. συμβάσεως δὲ πέρι 
τὸ διαλέγεσθαι πρὸς τοὺς ἐχθρούς, ἥνπερ ἐδόκουν 
εἶναι μόνην εὐπρεπῆ τοῦ πολέμου ἀπαλλαγήν, οὐχ 
ἑαυτοῖς μᾶλλον ἢ “Ρωμαίοις ἁρμόττειν ὑπελάμ.- 
βανον. “Ρωμαῖοι δὲ οὐδὲν ἧττον ἀλλὰ καὶ μᾶλλον 
τῶν Σαβίνων εἰς πολλὴν ἀπορίαν ἐνέπιπτον ὅ τι 
χρήσαιντο τοῖς πράγμασιν. οὔτε γὰρ ἀποδιδόναι 
τὰς γυναῖκας ἠξίουν οὔτε κατέχειν" τῷ μὲν ἧτταν 
ὁμολογουμένην ἀκολουθεῖν οἰόμενοι καὶ ἀναγκαῖόν 
σφισιν ἐσόμενον πᾶν ὅ τι ἂν ἄλλο ἐπιταχθῶσιν 
ὑπομένειν, τῷ δὲ πολλὰ καὶ δεινὰ ἐπιδεῖν χώρας τε 
πορθουμένης καὶ νεότητος τῆς κρατίστης ἀπολ- 
λυμένης - περὶ φιλίας τε εἰ διαλέγοιντο πρὸς τοὺς 
Σαβίνους, οὐδενὸς ὑπελάμβανον τεύξεσθαι τῶν 
μετρίων διὰ πολλὰ μὲν καὶ ἄλλα, μάλιστα δ᾽ ὅτι 
ταῖς αὐθαδείαις οὐ μετριότης γίνεται πρὸς τὸ ἀντί- 
παλον ἐπὶ θεραπείας τραπόμενον ἀλλὰ βαρύτης. 

1 ἀπάξουοιν Cobet, ἀπολύσουσιν Kiessling. ἀπίωσιν Naber: 
ἀποίσουσιν O, Jacoby. 

2 Sylburg: -πέμπονται O, -πέμπωνται Jacoby. 


?Sylburg: -μείνωσι B (?), -μένωσι R(?), Jacoby. _ 
‘ Kiessling: κράτος OQ. ὃ τὸ deleted by Reiske. 


438 


BOOK II. 44. 1-3 


XLIV. But during the following days the Sabines 
were taking counsel whether they should lead their 
forces back home, after doing all possible damage 
to the enemy’s country, or bs besa send for another 
army from home and still hold out obstinately until 
they should put an end to the war in the most 
honourable manner. They considered that it would 
be a bad thing for them either to return home with 
the shame of having effected nothing or to stay there 
when none of their attempts succeeded according 
to their expectations. And to treat with the enemy 
concerning an accommodation, which they looked 
upon as the only honourable means of putting an 
end to the war, they conceived to be no more fitting 
for them than for the Romans. On the other side, 
the Romans were not less, but even more, perplexed 
than the Sabines what course to take in the present 
juncture. For they could not resolve either to 
restore the women or to retain them, believing that 
the former course involved an acknowledgment of 
defeat and that it would be necessary to submit to 
whatever else might be imposed upon them, and 
that the alternative course would necessitate their 
witnessing many terrible sights as their country 
was being laid waste and the flower of their youth 
destroyed ; and, if they should treat with the Sabines 
for peace, they despaired of obtaining any moderate 
terms, not only for many, other reasons, but chiefly 
because the proud and headstrong treat an enemy 
who resorts to courting them, not with moderation, 
but with severity. 


439 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


XLV. Ἔν & δὲ ἀμφότεροι ταῦτα διαλογιζόμενοι 
καὶ οὔτε μάχης ἄρχειν τολμῶντες οὔτε περὶ φιλίας 
διαλεγόμενοι παρεῖλκον τὸν χρόνον, αἱ Ῥωμαίων 
γυναῖκες ὅσαι τοῦ Σαβίνων ἐτύγχανον οὖσαι γένους, 
δι᾿ ἃς ὁ πόλεμος συνειστήκει, συνελθοῦσαι δίχα τῶν 
ἀνδρῶν εἰς ἕν χωρίον καὶ λόγον ἑαυταῖς δοῦσαι 
γνώμην ἐποιήσαντο συμβατηρίων ἄρξαι πρὸς ἀμ- 
φοτέρους αὐταὶ" λόγων. ἡ δὲ τοῦτο εἰσηγησαμένη 
τὸ βούλευμα ταῖς γυν αιξὶν “Ερσιλία 3" μὲν ἐκαλεῖτο, 
γένους δ᾽ οὐκ ἀφανοῦς ἦν ἐν Σαβίνοις. ταύτην δ᾽ ot 
μέν φασ. γεγαμημένην ἤδη σὺν Ταῖς ἄλλαις ἁρ- 
πασθῆναι κόραις ὡς παρθένον, ot δὲ τὰ πιθανώ- 
τατα γράφοντες ἑκοῦσαν ὑπομεῖναι λέγουσι μετὰ 
θυγατρός - ἁρπασθῆναι yap δὴ κἀκείνης θυγατέρα 
μονογενῆ. ὡς δὲ ταύτην ἔσχον τὴν γνώμην αἱ 
γυναῖκες, ἧκον ἐπὶ τὸ συνέδριον καὶ τυχοῦσαι λόγου 
μακρὰς ἐξέτειναν δεήσεις, ἐπιτροπὴν ἀξιοῦσαι λα- 
βεῖν τῆς πρὸς τοὺς συγγενεῖς ἐξόδου, πολλὰς καὶ 
ἀγαθὰς ἐλπίδας ἔχειν λέγουσαι περὶ τοῦ συνάξειν 
εἰς ἕν τὰ ἔθνη καὶ ποιήσειν φιλίαν ὡς δὲ ταῦτ᾽ 
ἤκουσαν οἱ συνεδρεύοντες τῷ βασιλεῖ σφόδρα τε 
ἠγάσθησαν καὶ πόρον ὡς ἐν ἀμηχάνοις πράγμασι 
τοῦτον ὑπέλαβον εἶναι μόνον. γίνεται δὴ μετὰ 
τοῦτο δόγμα τοιόνδε βουλῆς. ὅσαι τοῦ Σαβίνων 
γένους ἦσαν ἔχουσαι τέκνα, ταύταις ἐξουσίαν εἶναι 
καταλιπούσαις τὰ τέκνα παρὰ τοῖς ἀνδράσι πρε- 
σβεύειν ὡς τοὺς ὁμοεθνεῖς, ὅσαι δὲ πλειόνων παίδων 

4 Ambrosch: αὗται B, om. R. 


2 ἐρσιλία A, ἑρσιλεία B (and so regularly), 
® φιλίαν Bb: φιλία Ba, φίλια A 


440 


BOOK II. 45, 1-4 


XLV. While! both sides were consuming the time 
in these considerations, neither daring to renew the 
fight nor treating for peace, the wives of the Romans 
who were of the Sabine race and the cause of the 
war, assembling in one place apart from their hus- 
bands and consulting together, determined to make 
the first overtures themselves to both armies con- 
cerning an accommodation. The one who proposed 
this measure to the rest of the women was named 
Hersilia, a woman of no obscure birth among the 
Sabines. Some say that, though already married, 
she was seized with the others as supposedly a 
virgin; but those who give the most probable 
account say that she remained with her daughter of 
her own free will, for according te them her only 
daughter was among those who had been seized. 
After the women had taken this resolution they came 
to the senate, and having obtained an audience, they 
made long pleas, begging to be permitted to go out 
to their relations and declaring that they had many 
excellent grounds for hoping to bring the two nations 
together and establish friendship between them. 
When the senators who were present in council with 
the king heard this, they were exceedingly pleased 
and looked upon it, in view of their present diffi- 
culties, as the only solution. Thereupon a decree 
of the senate was passed to the effect that those 
Sabine women who had children should, upon leaving 
them with their husbands, have permission to go 
as ambassadors to their countrymen, and that those 
who had several children should take along as many 


1 For chaps. 45-47 ef. Livy i. 13. 
441 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μητέρες ἦσαν ἐπάγεσθαι μοῖραν ἐξ αὐτῶν ὁσην- 
/ 
δήτινα Kal πράττειν ὅπως εἰς φιλίαν συνάξουσι τὰ 
” ~ ~ 
ἔθνη. μετὰ τοῦτο ἐξήεσαν ἐσθῆτας ἔχουσαι πενθί- 
μους, τινὲς δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ τέκνα νήπια ἐπαγόμεναι. 
« > > \ / ~ / ~ > ’ 
ὡς δ᾽ εἰς τὸν χάρακα τῶν Σαβίνων προῆλθον dévpo- 
μεναί τε καὶ προσπίπτουσαι τοῖς τῶν ἀπαντώντων ἢ 
~ one. 
γόνασι πολὺν οἶκτον ἐκ τῶν ὁρώντων ἐκίνησαν, καὶ 
τὰ δάκρυα κατέχειν οὐδεὶς ἱκανὸς ἦν. συναχθέντος 
δὲ αὐταῖς τοῦ συνεδρίου τῶν προβούλων καὶ κελεύ- 
σαντος τοῦ βασιλέως ὑπὲρ ὧν ἥκουσι λέγειν ἡ τοῦ 
/ ~ 
βουλεύματος ἄρξασα Kai τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἔχουσα τῆς 
/ « / \ \ ~ ὃ AAG 
πρεσβείας ᾿ ρσιλία μακρὰν καὶ συμπαθῆ διεξῆλθε 
~ / \ > να ~ / 
δέησιν, ἀξιοῦσα χαρίσασθαι τὴν εἰρήνην ταῖς δεομέ- 
~ ~ > 
vais ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀνδρῶν, δι᾽ ἃς ἐξενηνέχθαι τὸν πόλε- 
> / > 39 e ὃ \ / ὃ / i 
μον ἀπέφαινεν" ἐφ᾽ ois δὲ γενήσονται δικαίοις a 
ὃ αλ 7 A ε / > \ λθ / .41᾽ 
ιαλύσεις, τοὺς ἡγεμόνας αὐτοὺς συνελθόντας ἐφ 
~ \ \ ~ 
ἑαυτῶν διομολογήσασθαι πρὸς TO κοινῇ συμφέρον 
ὁρῶντας. 
~ ~ σ“ ~ 
XLVI. Τοιαῦτα εἰποῦσαι προὔπεσον ἅπασαι τῶν 
Ἢ , = \ , 
τοῦ βασιλέως γονάτων ἅμα Tots τέκνοις καὶ διέμενον 
\ 2 ~ ~ ε 
ἐρριμμέναι τέως ἀνέστησαν αὐτὰς ἐκ τῆς γῆς ot 
/ \ Ἁ 
παρόντες ἅπαντα ποιήσειν τὰ μέτρια καὶ TA” δυ- 
\ \ 
vaTa ὑπισχνούμενοι. μεταστησάμενοι δὲ αὐτὰς 
~ 3. "Ἃς \ 
ἐκ τοῦ συνεδρίου Kat βουλευσάμενοι καθ᾽ ἑαυτοὺς 
~ / \ ἃ - 
ἔκριναν ποιεῖσθαι τὰς διαλλαγάς. καὶ γίνονται τοῖς 
~ / 
ἔθνεσιν ἐκεχειρίαι μὲν πρῶτον " ἔπειτα συνελθόντων 
~ ~ \ / ψ \ \ 
τῶν βασιλέων συνθῆκαι περὶ φιλίας. ἦν δὲ τὰ 
~ \ - \ a 
συνομολογηθέντα τοῖς ἀνδράσι, περὶ ὧν τοὺς ὅρκους 


. ~ . . 6 ’ὔ 
1 τοῖς τῶν ἀπαντώντων Reiske: τοῖς ἁπάντων Ὁ. 


442 


BOOK II. 45, 4-46, 2 


of them as they wished and endeavour to reconcile 
the two nations. After this the women went out 
dressed in mourning, some of them also carrying their 
infant children. When they arrived in the camp of 
the Sabines, lamenting and falling at the feet of 
those they met, they aroused great compassion in all 
who saw them and none could refrain from tears. 
And when the councillors had been called together 
to receive them and the king had commanded 
them to state their reasons for coming, Hersilia, 
who had proposed the plan and was at the head 
of the embassy, delivered a long and _ pathetic 
plea, begging them to grant peace to those who 
were interceding for their husbands and on whose 
account, she pointed out, the war had been under- 
taken. As to the terms, however, on which peace 
should be made, she said the leaders, coming to- 
gether by themselves, might settle them with a view 
to the advantage of both parties. 

XLVI. After she had spoken thus, all the women 
with their children threw themselves at the feet of 
the king and remained prostrate till those who were 
present raised them from the ground and promised 
to do everything that was reasonable and in their 
power. Then, having ordered them to withdraw 
from the council and having consulted together, 
they decided to make peace. And first a truce 
was agreed upon between the two nations; then 
the kings met together and a treaty of friend- 
ship was concluded. The terms agreed upon by the 
two, which they confirmed by their oaths, were as 





*7a added by Jacoby. 
443 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> / LAN / \ εὺ 4 / 
ἐποιήσαντο, τοιάδε: βασιλέας μὲν εἶναι Ρωμαίων 
« / \ / 3, / + A A 
Ρωμύλον καὶ Τάτιον ἰσοψήφους ὄντας καὶ τιμὰς 
U A 
καρπουμένους Tas ἴσας, καλεῖσθαι δὲ τὴν μὲν πόλιν 
~ / 
ἐπὶ τοῦ κτίσαντος τὸ αὐτὸ φυλάττουσαν ὄνομα 
u ~ ~ ~ 
“Ρώμην, καὶ eva ἕκαστον τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ πολιτῶν 
e - / ~ 
Ρωμαῖον, ὡς πρότερον, τοὺς δὲ σύμπαντας ἐπὶ τῆς 
/ 4. =~ 
Τατίου πατρίδος κοινῇ περιλαμβανομένους κλήσει 
/ / \ \ / / 
Κυρίτας - πολιτεύειν δὲ τοὺς βουλομένους Σαβίνων 
ἐν Ρώμῃ ἱερά τε συνενεγκαμένους καὶ εἰς φυλὰς 
> ~ 
καὶ eis φράτρας ἐπιδοθέντας. ταῦτα ὀμόσαντες 
> ~ 
καὶ βωμοὺς ἐπὶ τοῖς ὅρκοις ἱδρυσάμενοι κατὰ 
\ ε 
μέσην μάλιστα τὴν καλουμένην ἱερὰν ὁδὸν συνε- 
/ > / \ ¢€ \ » A 
κεράσθησαν ἀλλήλοις. Kai ot μὲν ἄλλοι τὰς δυ- 
e / ~ 
νάμεις ἀναλαβόντες ἡγεμόνες ἀπῆγον ἐπ᾽ οἴκου, 
\ ~ ~ 
Τάτιος δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ τρεῖς ἄνδρες 
” ~ / e / > « / \ 
οἴκων τῶν διαφανεστάτων ὑπέμειναν ev Ρώμῃ καὶ 
> ~ > ~ 
τιμὰς ἔσχον, as TO ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐκαρποῦτο γένος, 
Οὐόλοσσος 5 Οὐαλέριος καὶ Τάλλος Τυράννιος 8 
5» / \ ~ / 7 ¢ \ 
ἐπίκλησιν καὶ τελευταῖος Μέττιος Κούρτιος, 6 τὴν 
A / e 
λίμνην adv τοῖς ὅπλοις διανηξάμενος, ots παρέμειναν 
~ A / ~ 
ἑταϊροί" τε καὶ συγγενεῖς καὶ πελάται, τῶν ἐπι- 
> 
χωρίων ἀριθμὸν οὐκ ἐλάττους. 
/ δὲ “ / ” 
XLVI. Καταστάντων δὲ τῶν πραγμάτων ἔδοξε 
κι ~ > \ AAT > ὃ > ” r 
τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν, ἐπειδὴ πολλὴν ἐπίδοσιν εἰς ὄχλου 
~ / ~ 
πλῆθος ἡ πόλις εἰλήφει, διπλάσιον τοῦ προτέρου 
1 Reiske proposed to read ὅροις, Naber ὁρίοις. 
2 Kiessling: βουλοσσὸς O; οὐολεσσὸς early editors. 
8 Perizonius: τύραννος O. By a typographical error 


Jacoby cited and adopted Τυράννως as Perizonius’ reading. 
4 ἑταῖροι Bb: ἕτεροι Bah. 


444 


BOOK IT. 46, 2-47, 1 


follows: that Romulus and Tatius should be kings 
of the Romans with equal authority and should 
enjoy equal honours; that the city, preserving its 
name, should from its founder be called Rome: 
that each individual citizen should as before be 
called a Roman, but that the people collectively 
should be comprehended under one general appella- 
tion and from the city of Tatius! be called Quirites, 
and that all the Sabines who wished might live in 
Rome. joiming in common rites with the Romans and 
being assigned to tribes and curiae. After they had 
sworn to this treaty and, to confirm their oaths, 
had erected altars near the middle of the Sacred 
Way, as it is called, they mingled together. And all 
the commanders returned home with their forces 
except Tatius, the king, and three persons of the 
most illustrious families, who remained at Rome and 
received those honours which their posterity after 
them enjoyed; these were Volusus? Valerius and 
Tallus, surnamed Tyrannius, with Mettius Curtius, 
the man who swam cross the lake with his arms, 
and with them there remained also their com- 
panions, relations and clients, no fewer in number 
than the former inhabitants. 

XLVII. Everything being thus settled, the kings 
thought proper, since the city had received a great 
increase of people, to double the number of the 


1Cures ; see chap. 36, 3; 48. Dionysius is giving the 
ordinary Roman derivation of Quirites. The word may. 
however, come directly from the Sabine quiris (chap. 48. 
end) and mean the “ spear men.’ 

* The name should probably be Volesus, as spelled by 
Livy (i. 58, 6; ii. 18, 6) and other Roman writers. 


445 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ποιῆσαι τὸν τῶν πατρικίων ἀριθμὸν προσκαταλέ- 
ἕαντας Tots! ἐπιφανεστάτοις οἴκοις ἐκ τῶν ὕστερον 
> » ~ 
ἐποικησάντων ἴσους τοῖς προτέροις, νεωτέρους οὕς 
> 2 c 
ἐκάλεσαν Tatpikious: ἐξ ὧν ἑκατὸν avopas, οὗς at 
φρᾶτραι προεχειρίσαντο, τοῖς ἀρχαίοις βουλευταῖς 
προσέγραψαν. περὶ μὲν οὖν τούτων ὀλίγου δεῖν 
« “- « 
πάντες οἱ συγγράψαντες τὰς “Ῥωμαϊκὰς ἱστορίας 
συμπεφωνήκασιν, ὀλίγοι δέ τινες περὶ τοῦ πλήθους 
τῶν προσκαταγραφέντων βουλευτῶν διαφέρονται. 
οὐ γὰρ ἑκατὸν ἀλλὰ πεντήκοντα τοὺς ἐπεισελθόντας 
> \ \ > / / \ \ ~ 
εἰς τὴν βουλὴν ἀποφαίνουσι γενέσθαι. περὶ δὲ τῶν 
= ~ ε - > 
τιμῶν, as ταῖς γυναιξὶν ot βασιλεῖς ἀπέδοσαν, ὅτι 
/ > A > , 3 “ ῬῬ / 
συνήγαγον αὐτοὺς eis φιλίαν, οὐχ ἅπαντες “Ῥωμαίων 
- \ \ \ ~ 
συγγραφεῖς συμφέρονται. τινὲς μὲν yap αὐτῶν 
» A \ / /, 
γράφουσι τά τε ἄλλα πολλὰ Kat μεγάλα δωρήσασθαι 
~ \ \ e / \ \ \ \ / 
ταῖς γυναιξὶ τοὺς ἡγεμόνας καὶ δὴ Kal Tas φράτρας 
i] vy > / ~ 
τριάκοντα οὔσας, ὥσπερ ἔφην, ἐπωνύμους τῶν γυ- 
~ ~ “5 ~ 
ναικῶν ποιῆσαι" τοσαύτας yap εἶναι γυναῖκας Tas 
2 , Od / δὲ { ΄, ~ > 
ἐπιπρεσβευσαμένας. Oddppwv de Τερέντιος τοῦτ 
- - / , 
αὐτοῖς τὸ μέρος οὐχ ὁμολογεῖ παλαίτερον ἔτι λέγων 
- ~ gs gh sf \ ae 4 
tais” κουρίαις τεθῆναι τὰ ὀνόματα ὑπὸ τοῦ “Ῥωμύλου 
~ / \ \ 2 19 
κατὰ τὴν πρώτην TOD πλήθους διαίρεσιν, τὰ μὲν ἀπ 
> ~ / e / \ 5° > A / ao 
ἀνδρῶν ληφθέντα ἡγεμόνων, τὰ ἀπὸ πάγων 
΄, 3 py | \ / > λθ / “ > 
τάς T ἐπὶ τὴν πρεσβείαν ἐξελθούσας γυναῖκας οὐ 
/ \ 
τριάκοντα εἶναί φησιν, ἀλλὰ πεντακοσίας τε Kal 
΄- , / > > ‘ > 
τριάκοντα τριῶν δεούσας οἴεταί τε οὐδ᾽ εἰκὸς εἶναι 
~ \ > / \ “- 
τοσούτων γυναικῶν τιμὴν ἀφελομένους τοὺς βασιλεῖς 
> / > > ~ ~ / > > « A A 
ὀλίψαις ἐξ αὐτῶν δοῦναι μόναις. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν 


446 


BOOK II. 47, 1-4 


patricians by adding to the most distinguished 
families others from among the new settlers equal 
in number to the old, and they called these “* new 
patricians.” Of these a hundred persons, chosen by 
the curiae, were enrolled with the original senators. 
Concerning these matters almost all ice writers of 
Roman history agree. But some few differ re- 
garding the number of the newly-enrolled senators. 
for they say it was not a hundred, but fifty, that were 
added to the senate. Concerning the honours. 
also, which the kings conferred on the women 
in return for having reconciled them, not all the 
Roman historians agree; for some write that, 
besides many other signal marks of honour which 
they bestowed upon them, they gave their names 
to the curiae, which were thirty, as I have said, that 
being the number of the women who went upon the 
embassy. But Terentius Varro does not agree with 
them in this particular, for he says that Romulus 
gave the names to the curiae earlier than this, when 
he first divided the people, some of these names 
being taken from men who were their leaders and 
others from districts ; and he says that the number 
of the women who went upon the embassy was not 
thirty, but five hundred and twenty-seven, and he 
thinks it very improbable that the kings would have 
deprived so many women of this honour to bestow 
it upon only a few of them. But as regards these 





1 τοῖς Garrer: σὺν τοῖς O, Jacoby. 
2 ἔτι λέγων ταῖς Sylburg: τε λέγων ἐν ταῖς O. 
8 ἀπὸ πάγων Kiessling: ἀπὸ πάντων BbR, ἐπὶ πάντων Ba. 


447 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τούτων οὔτε μηδένα ποιήσασθαι λόγον οὔτε πλείω 
γράφειν τῶν ἱκανῶν ἐφαίνετό μοι. 

XLVIII. Περὶ δὲ τῆς Κυριτῶν πόλεως, ἐξ ἧς 
οἱ περὶ τὸν Τάτιον 7% ἦσαν (ἀπαιτεῖ γὰρ ἡ διήγησις καὶ 
περὶ τούτων, οἵτινές τε καὶ ὁπόθεν ἦσαν, εἰπεῖν) 
τοσαῦτα tae as iar ev TH Peativwv χώρᾳ καθ᾽ 
ὃν χρόνον ᾿Αβοριγῖνες αὐτὴν κατεῖχον παρθένος τις 
ἐπιχωρία τοῦ πρώτου γένους εἰς ἱερὸν ἦλθεν ᾿Ενυα- 
λίου χορεύσουσα ". τὸν δ᾽ ᾿Ενυάλιον οἱ Σαβῖνοι καὶ 
παρ᾽ ἐκείνων οἱ Ρωμαῖοι μαθόντες Κυρῖνον ὀνομά- 
ζουσιν, οὐκ ἔχοντες εἰπεῖν τὸ ἀκριβὲς εἴτε Ἄρης 
ἐστὶν εἴτε ἕτερός τις ὁμοίας Ἄρει τιμὰς ἔχων. ot 
μὲν γὰρ ἐφ᾽ ἑνὸς οἴονται θεοῦ πολεμικῶν ἀγώνων 
ἡγεμόνος ἑκάτερον τῶν ὀνομάτων κατηγορεῖσθαι,3 
οἱ δὲ κατὰ δύο τάττεσθαι δαιμόνων πολεμιστῶν τὰ 
ὀνόματα. ἐν δὴ 5 τοῦ θεοῦ τῷ τεμένει χορεύουσα 
ἡ παῖς ἔνθεος ἄφνω γίνεται καὶ καταλιποῦσα τὸν 
χορὸν εἰς τὸν σηκὸν εἰστρέχει τοῦ θεοῦ. ἔπειτα 
ἐγκύμων ἐκ τοῦ δαίμονος, ὡς ἅπασιν ἐδόκει, γενο- 
μένη τίκτει παῖδα Μόδιον ὄνομα, Φαβίδιον ἐπί- 
κλησιν, ὃς ἀνδρωθεὶς μορφήν τε οὐ κατ ἄνθρωπον 
ἀλλὰ δαιμόνιον ἴσχει, καὶ τὰ πολέμια πάντων γίνεται 
λαμπρότατος" καὶ αὐτὸν εἰσέρχεται πόθος οἰκίσαι 
πόλιν ef ἑαυτοῦ συναγαγὼν δὴ χεῖρα πολλὴν 
τῶν περὶ ἐκεῖνα τὰ χωρία οἰκούντων ἐν ὀλίγῳ πάνυ 
χρόνῳ κτίζει τὰς καλουμένας Κύρεις, ὡς μέν τινες 
ἱστοροῦσιν ἐπὶ τοῦ δαίμονος, ἐξ οὗ γενέσθαι λόγος 

1 Reiske: χορεύουσα O. 


2 κατηγορεῖσθαι B: κατηγορῆσθαι A, Jacoby. 
8 δὴ Ambrosch: δὲ O. 


448 


BOOK II. 47 4-48 4 


matters, it has not seemed to me fitting either to omit 
all mention of them or to say more than is sufficient. 

XLVIII. Concerning the city of Cures from which 
Tatius and his followers came (for the course οἱ 
my narrative requires that I should speak of them 
also, and say who they were and whence). we have 
received the following account. In the territory of 
Reate, when the Aborigines were in possession of it, 
a certain maiden of that country, who was of the 
highest birth, went into the temple of Enyalius to 
dance. The Sabines and the Romans, who have 
learned it from them, give to Enyalius the name of 
Quirinus, without being able to affirm for certain 
whether he is Mars or some other god who enjoys the 
same honours as Mars. For some think that both 
these names are used of one and the same god who 
presides over martial combats; others, that the 
names are applied to two different gods of war. 
Be that as it may, this maiden, while she was danc- 
ing in the temple, was on a sudden seized with divine 
inspiration, and quitting the dance, ran into the 
inner sanctuary of the god; after which, being 
with child by this divinity, as everybody believed, 
she brought forth a son named Modius, with the 
surname Fabidius, who, being arrived at manhood, 
had not a human but a divine form and was re- 
nowned above all others for his warlike deeds. 
And conceiving a desire to found a city on his own 
account, he gathered together a great number of 
people of the neighbourhood and in a very short time 
built the city called Cures: he gave it this name. 
as some say, from the divinity whose son he was 


449 


‘ 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> ‘ s » ΄ / ‘ ε > @ 
αὑτὸν εἶχε, τοὔνομα TH πόλει θέμενος, ws δ᾽ ἕτεροι 
7, 353 5 8 ~ ? ~ ΄, \ ς 
γράφουσιν ἐπὶ τῆς αἰχμῆς κύρεις γὰρ οἱ Σαβῖνοι 
τὰς αἰχμὰς καλοῦσιν. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν Τερέντιος 
Οὐάρρων γράφει. 
XLIX. Ζηνόδοτος δ᾽ ὁ" Τροιζήνιος, συγγραφεὺς 
2 ᾿Ομβρικοὺς ἔθνος αὐθιγεινὲς ὃ ἱστορεῖ τὸ μὲν 
~ ~ ‘ ΄ « ͵ 
πρῶτον οἰκῆσαι περὶ τὴν καλουμένην “Peativny: 
? ~ ~ 
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ὑπὸ Πελασγῶν ἐξελαθέντας εἰς ταύτην 
> 4 ΄σ » ~ ~ 
ἀφικέσθαι τὴν γῆν ἔνθα viv οἰκοῦσι Kal μετα- 
βαλόντας ἅμα τῷ τόπῳ τοὔνομα Σαβίνους ἐξ 
Ομβρικῶιν προσαγορευθῆναι. Κάτων δὲ Πόρκιος 
‘ Ἁ ἕω ~ , »Μ ~ ‘i > ‘ 
TO μὲν ὄνομα τῷ Σαβίνων ἔθνει τεθῆναι φησιν ἐπὶ 
Σάβου" τοῦ Σάγκου δαιμονος ἐπιχωρίου, τοῦτον 
δὲ τὸν Σάγκον ὑπό τινων [Π]ίστιον καλεῖσθαι 4ία. 
πρώτην δ᾽ αὐτῶν οἴκησιν ἀποφαίνει γενέσθαι κώμην 
‘ ~ ~ ‘ > ͵ 
τινὰ καλουμένην Τεστροῦναν ἀγχοῦ πόλεως ᾿Αμιτέρ- 
͵ -- 3 
νης κειμένην, ἐξ ἧς ὁρμηθέντας τότε Σαβίνους εἰς 
τὴν ‘Pearivny ἐμβαλεῖν ᾿4βοριγίνων ἅμα ]ελασγοῖς 
κατοικούντων καὶ πόλιν αὐτῶν τὴν ἐπιφανεστάτην 
, 5 ‘ ‘ ~ > 
Κοτυλίας ° πολέμῳ χειρωσαμένους κατασχεῖν. ἐκ 
\ Fata , > ͵ > Fp »” 
δὲ τῆς “Peativns ἀποικίας ἀποστείλαντας ἄλλας τε 
, , > τ ~ , A 
πόλεις κτίσαι πολλάς, ἐν ais οἰκεῖν ἀτειχίστοις, Kat 
Ἶ͵ / 7 \ 
δὴ Kai τὰς προσαγορευομένας Kuipers: χώραν δὲ 
1 δ᾽ (δὲ) 6 Ambrosch: δὲ O. 
2 Lacuna recognized by Kiessling, who supplied παλαιὸς 
or λόγου ἄξιος. : : . 
ὅ ᾽Ομβρικοὺς ἔθνος αὐθιγενὲς Reiske: ὀμβρικοῦ ἔθνους αὐὖθι- 


yeveis Ο. 
4Sylburg: σαβίνου Ο. 


450 


BOOK II. 48. 4-49, 3 


reputed to be, or, as others state. from a spear, 
since the Sabines cali spears cures.! This is the 
account given by Terentius Varro. 

XLIX. But Zenodotus of Troezen, a... his- 
torian,* relates that the Umbrians, a native race, first 
dwelt in the Reatine territory, as it is called, and that, 
being driven from there by the Pelasgians, they came 
into the country which they now inhabit. and chang- 
ing their name with their place of habitation, from 
Umbrians were called Sabines. But Porcius Cato 
says that the Sabine race received its name from 
Sabus, the son of Sancus. a divinity of that country, 
and that this Sancus was by some called Jupiter 
Fidius. He says also that their first place of abode 
was a certain village called Testruna, situated near 
the city of Amiternum ; that from there the Sabines 
made an incursion at that time into the Reatine 
territory, which was inhabited by the Aborig- 
ines together with the Pelasgians,? and took their 
most famous city, Cutiliae, by force of arms and 
occupied it; and that, sending colonies out of the 
Reatine territory, they built many cities, in which 
they lived without fortifying them, among others 
the city called Cures. He further states that the 


Or quires. The Greek spelling can represent either 
form. 

* The Greek text suggests the loss of an adjective or 
phrase qualifying “historian.” See critica] note. 

3 The word “ Pelasgians’”’ is due to Reiske. See critical 
note and i. 19 f. 





ὃ Πελαογοῖς added by Reiske; Kiessling emended ἅμα to 
αὐτὴν. 
® Gelenius: κοτύνας O. 


451 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ ~ \ > ~ ’ὔ > ͵ 
κατασχεῖν τῆς μὲν ᾿Αδριανῆς θαλάττης ἀπέχουσαν 
ἀμφὶ τοὺς ὀγδοήκοντα καὶ διακοσίους σταδίους, 
τῆς δὲ Τυρρηνικῆς τετταράκοντα πρὸς διακοσίοις" 
~ Ἂν ~ > 5 > ~ 
μῆκος δὲ αὐτῆς εἶναι φησιν ὀλίγῳ μεῖον σταδίων 
΄ » ΄ \ + ¢€ A ~ / 
χιλίων. ἔστι δέ τις Kai ἄλλος ὑπὲρ τῶν Σαβίνων 
a ͵ ΄ ε 
ἐν ἱστορίαις ἐπιχωρίοις λεγόμενος λόγος, ws Aake- 
= } ΑΞ gh ay 
δαιμονίων ἐποικησάντων αὐτοῖς καθ᾽ ὃν χρόνον 
9 / Εὖ \ LO λ ὃ ~ A ~ 
ἐπιτροπεύων Εὔνομον tov ἀδελφιδοῦν “υκοῦργος 
~ > ͵ 
ἔθετο τῇ Σπάρτῃ τοὺς νόμους. ἀχθομένους γάρ 
τινας τῇ σκληρότητι τῆς νομοθεσίας καὶ διαστάντας 
~ / ~ 
ἀπὸ τῶν ἑτέρων οἴχεσθαι TO παράπαν EK τῆς πόλεως ° 
"» \ / ~ y eA 
ἔπειτα διὰ πελάγους πολλοῦ φερομένους εὔξασθαι 
τοῖς θεοῖς (πόθον γάρ τινα ὑπελθεῖν αὐτοὺς ὁποι- 
~ a a” 7 > 
ασδήποτε γῆς) εἰς ἣν av ἔλθωσι πρώτην, ἐν ταύτῃ" 
Z Ἂν - b ΄ \ 
κατοικήσειν. καταχθέντας δὲ τῆς ᾿Ϊταλίας περὶ τὰ 
καλούμενα Ilwyevtiva πεδία τό τε χωρίον, ἐν ᾧ 
~ ΄ ΄ > \ ~ 
πρῶτον ὡρμίσαντο, Φορωνίαν 5 ἀπὸ τῆς πελαγίου 
~ ¢ « 
φορήσεως ὀνομάσαι καὶ θεᾶς ἱερὸν ἱδρύσασθαι 
΄ 3 φ' \ > \ 24 P Δ - te οὶ 3 ~ 
Dopwvias,®? 7 τὰς εὐχὰς ἔθεντο᾽ ἣν νῦν ἑνὸς ἀλλαγῇ 
͵΄ ~ > -“ 9 
γράμματος Φερωνίαν καλοῦσιν. ἐκεῖθεν δ᾽ ὁρμη- 
θέντας αὐτῶν τινας συνοίκους τοῖς Σαβίνοις γε- 
νέσθαι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο πολλὰ τῶν νομίμων εἶναι 
) ἫΝ ΄ 
Σαβίνων Δακωνικά, μάλιστα δὲ τὸ φιλοπόλεμόν 
τε καὶ τὸ λιτοδίαιτον καὶ παρὰ πάντα τὰ ἔργα τοῦ 
1 ταύτῃ Reiske: αὐτῇ Ο. 
ὃ Ambrosch: φερωνείαν B, φερωνίαν R. 


8 Ambrosch: φορωνείας B, φερωνίας R. 
4 Σαβίνων B: om. R. 





'The Pomptinus ager of Livy (ii. 34; iv. 25). The 
margina! lands stretching round the Pontine marshes. 


452 


BOOK ITI. 49, 3-5 


country they occupied was distant from the Adriatic 
about two hundred and eighty stades and from the 
Tyrrhenian Sea two hundred and forty, and that 
its length was a little less than a thousand stades. 
There is also another account given of the Sa- 
bines in the native histories, to the effect that a 
colony of Lacedaemonians settled among them 
at the time when Lycurgus, being guardian to his 
nephew Eunomus, gave his laws to Sparta. For 
the story goes that some of the Spartans, disliking 
the severity of his laws and separating from the rest, 
quitted the city entirely, and after being borne 
through a vast stretch of sea, made a vow to the gods 
to settle in the first land they should reach; for 
a longing came upon them for any land whatsoever. 
At last they made that part of Italy which lies 
near the Pomentine plains! and they called the 
place where they first landed Foronia, in memory of 
their being borne? through the sea, and built a temple 
to the goddess Foronia, to whom they had addressed 
their vows; this goddess, by the alteration of one 
letter, they now call Feronia. And some of them, 
setting out from thence, settled among the Sabines. 
It is for this reason, they say, that many of the 
habits of the Sabines are Spartan, particularly their 
fondness for war and their frugality and a severity 


* One wonders why the author of this fanciful etymology 
did not connect Feronia directly with the verb φέρεσθαι 
(““to be borne along’’), instead of assuming an earlier 
spelling Foronia, not otherwise attested, and deriving that 
form from the abstract noun φόρησις. The name has not 
as yet been satisfactorily explained. 


453 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


βίου σκληρόν. ὑπὲρ μὲν δὴ τοῦ Σαβίνων γένους 
ταῦθ᾽ ἱκανά. 

L. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν ἹΡωμύλον καὶ Τάτιον τήν 
τε πόλιν εὐθὺς ἐποίουν μείζονα προσθέντες ἑτέρους 
> ~ / / 4 / / \ A 
αὐτῇ δύο λόφους, τόν τε Kupinov κληθέντα καὶ τὸν 

Κ. / \ / A > / \ > 7, 
αίλιον, καὶ διελόμενοι τὰς οἰκήσεις χωρὶς ἀλλήλων 
δίαιταν ἐν τοῖς ἰδίοις ἑκάτεροι χωρίοις ἐποιοῦντο, 
“Ῥωμύλος μὲν τὸ Παλάτιον κατέχων καὶ τὸ [Καίλιον 
Μ ” \ ~ / / / \ 
ὄρος (ἔστι δὲ τῷ Iladatiw προσεχές), Τάτιος δὲ 
τὸν Kamitwdivov,! ὅνπερ ἐξ ἀρχῆς κατέσχε, καὶ τὸν 
Kupinov ὄχθον. τὸ δ᾽ ὑποκείμενον τῷ Καπιτωλίῳ 
πεδίον ἐκκόψαντες τὴν ἐν αὐτῷ πεφυκυῖαν ὕλην καὶ 
τῆς λίμνης, ἣ δὴ διὰ τὸ κοῖλον εἶναι τὸ χωρίον 
- -~ ~ ~ \ 
ἐπλήθυε τοῖς κατιοῦσιν ἐκ τῶν ὁρῶν νάμασι, Ta 
ἊΝ 
πολλὰ χώσαντες ἀγορὰν αὐτόθι κατεστήσαντο, 7 
~ - ~ \ 
Kal νῦν ἔτι χρώμενοι “Pwyator διατελοῦσι, καὶ τὰς 
7 > ~ » ~ 3 e / / 
συνόδους ἐνταῦθα ἐποιοῦντο ἐν ᾿Ηφαίστου χρηματί- 
nn ~ > ~ 
ζοντες ἱερῷ μικρὸν ὑπερανεστηκότι" τῆς ἀγορᾶς. 
φ 
ἱερά τε ἱδρύσαντο καὶ βωμοὺς καθιέρωσαν οἷς 
- ε / \ 
ηὔξαντο κατὰ τὰς μάχας θεοῖς, “Ῥωμύλος μὲν 
> ͵ A ,ὔ 
Ορθωσίῳ Διὶ παρὰ ταῖς καλουμέναις ΜὝουγωνίσι 38 
/ a / > \ / > ~ c “-“ 
πύλαις, at φέρουσιν εἰς τὸ Παλάτιον ἐκ τῆς ἱερᾶς 
~ ~ ~ “4 
ὁδοῦ, ὅτι τὴν στρατιὰν αὐτοῦ φυγοῦσαν ἐποίησεν 
΄ - ~ \ \ 
ὁ θεὸς ὑπακούσας ταῖς εὐχαῖς στῆναί τε Kal πρὸς 
\ 7 
ἀλκὴν τραπέσθαι. Τάτιος δὲ ᾿Ηλίῳ τε καὶ LeAjvy 
€ / \ 
καὶ Κρόνῳ καὶ ‘Péa, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ᾿ Εστίᾳ καὶ 
\ Μ 
“Ηφαίστῳ καὶ ᾿Αρτέμιδι καὶ ᾿Ενυαλίῳ καὶ ἄλλοις 
~ * A / \ 
θεοῖς, ὧν χαλεπὸν ἐξειπεῖν ᾿Ελλάδι γλώττῃ τὰ 
1 Kiessling ; καπιτώλιον O. 
* Ambrosch : ἐπανεστηκότι O, Jacoby. 


* Μουγωνίσι Ambrosch; μουρωνίσι ABa, μυρωνίσι Bb. 
454 


BOOK II. 49, 5-50, 3 


in all the actions of their lives. But this is enough 
about the Sabine race. 

L. Romulus and Tatius immediately enlarged the 
city by adding to it two other hills, the Quirinal, as 
it is called, and the Caelian; and separating their 
habitations, each of them had his particular place 
of residence. Romulus occupied the Palatine and 
Caelian hills, the latter being next to the Palatine, 
and Tatius the Capitoline hill, which he had seized 
in the beginning, and the Quirinal. And cutting 
down the wood that grew on the plain at the foot 
of the Capitoline and filling up the greatest part 
of the lake, which, since it lay in a hollow, was 
kept well supplied by the waters that came down 
from the hills, they converted this plain inte a 
forum, which the Romans continue to use even now ; 
there they held their assemblies, transacting their 
business in the temple of Vulcan, which stands a 
little above the Forum. They built temples also 
and consecrated altars to those gods to whom they 
had addressed their vows during their battles: 
Romulus to Jupiter Stator,! near the Porta Mugonia, 
as it is called. which leads to the Palatine hill from 
the Sacred Way, because this god had heard his 
vows and had caused his army to stop in its flight 
and to renew the battle; and Tatius to the Sun 
and Moon, to Saturn and to Rhea, and, besides 
these, to Vesta, Vulcan, Diana, Enyalius, and to 
other gods whose names are diflicult to be ex- 
pressed in the Greek language; and in every curia 


1 The “ Stayer ”’ of their flight, 
455 


H= 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> ¢ / - 
ὀνόματα, ἐν ἁπάσαις τε ταῖς κουρίαις “Hpa τραπέ- 
50 K; ὃ 1 λ / a \ 3 ὃ / 
Cas ἔθετο Κυριτίδι ' λεγομένῃ, at Kat εἰς τόδε χρόνου 
a ” \ = , , > , 
κεῖνται. ἔτη μὲν οὖν πέντε συνεβασίλευσαν ἀλλή- 
/ / 
λοις ὑπὲρ οὐδενὸς διαφερόμενοι χρήματος, ἐν οἷς 
lad \ ? 
κοινὴν πρᾶξιν ἀπεδείξαντο τὴν ἐπὶ Kapepivous 
> / ¢ ~ 
στρατείαν. λῃστήρια yap ἐκπέμποντες ot Kapepivor 
καὶ πολλὰ τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν κακοῦντες οὐ συν- 
/ > \ / / ¢€ 3 ’ ~ y 
éBawov ἐπὶ δίκην πολλάκις ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν καλούμενοι " 
/ 7 ? 
ots ἐκ παρατάξεώς τε νικήσαντες (ἐχώρησαν yap 
- \ ~ > 
αὐτοῖς ὁμόσε) Kal μετὰ ταῦτα EK τειχομαχίας κατὰ 
/ « / a \ > / \ ’ὔ 
κράτος ἑλόντες ὅπλα μὲν ἀφείλοντο καὶ χώρας 
~ ‘ J Δ ~ 4 
ἐζημίωσαν τῇ τρίτῃ pepide: ἣν Tots σφετέροις 
~ ~ Q > / 
διεῖλον. τῶν δὲ Kapepivwv τοὺς ἐποίκους 5 λυ- 
, ΄ / 
μαινομένων ὃ ἐπεξελθόντες Kai Tpexpapevor* αὐτούς, 
τὰ μὲν αὐτῶν ἅπαντα τοῖς σφετέροις πολίταις 
- > \ \ \ > / ¢ / > 4 
διεῖλον, αὐτοὺς δὲ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ὁπόσοι ἐβούλοντο 
- ” > > 
ἐν “Ῥώμῃ κατοικεῖν εἴασαν. ἐγένοντο δ᾽ ws τετρα- 
/ ~ > 
κισχίλιοι, οὗς ταῖς φράτραις ἐπεμέρισαν, Kal τὴν 
~ ͵ e >’ / 4) 
πόλιν αὐτῶν ἀποικίαν “Ῥωμαίων ἐποίησαν. ἦν δὲ 
᾿Αλβανῶν ἀπόκτισις ὃ ἡ Kapepia πολλοῖς χρόνοις 
- / ~ € if \ 5 > - 
ἀποσταλεῖσα πρότερον τῆς “Ῥώμης, τὸ δ᾽ ἀρχαῖον 
5 , > ~ / > Z 
Apopiyivwy οἴκησις ἐν τοῖς ὃ πάνυ ἐπιφανής. 
5» ~ \ -“ ’ / > σ΄ 
LI. ᾿Ενιαυτῷ δὲ ἕκτῳ περιίσταται πάλιν εἰς ἕνα 
« / e ~ “λ 3 \ ἴῃ / λ / 
᾿ωμύλον ἡ τῆς πόλεως ἀρχὴ Τατίου τελευτήσαντος 
1Sch6mann: κυριτίᾳ AB. 
2 The words τοῖς σφετέροις. . . ἐποίκους were supplied by 
Kiessling (who used the form Kapepwatwr). 
3 τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ after λυμαινομένων deleted by Kiessling. 
4 τρεψάμενοι Kayser: τροπωσάμενοι O. 


5 ἀπόκτισις ABa: ἀποίκησις Bb. 
5 τοῖς Sintenis: ταῖς Ὁ. 


456 


BOOK IT. 50, 3-51, 1 


he dedicated tables to Juno called Quiritis,) which 
remain even to this day. For five years, then, 
the kings reigned together in perfect harmony, 
during which time they engaged in one joint under- 
taking, the expedition against the Camerini; for 
these people, who kept sending out bands of robbers 
and doing great injury to the country of the Romans, 
would not agree to have the case submitted to 
judicial investigation, though often summoned by 
the Romanstodoso. After conquering the Camerini 
in a pitched battle (for they came to blows with 
them) and later besieging and taking their town 
by storm, they disarmed the inhabitants and de- 
prived them of a third part of their land, which 
they divided among their own people.?» And when 
the Camerini proceeded to harass the new settlers, 
they marched out against them, and having put them 
to flight, divided all their possessions among their 
own people, but permitted as many of the inhabitants 
as wished to do so to live at Rome. These amounted 
to about four thousand, whom they distributed 
among the curiae, and they made their city a Roman 
colony. Cameria was a colony of the Albans planted 
long before the founding of Rome, and anciently one 
of the most celebrated habitations of the Aborigines. 

LI. But 8 in the sixth year, the government of the 
city devolved once more upon Romulus alone, Tatius 


1 The name also appears as Quiris, Curis and Cur(r)itis. 
It was variously derived from currus (“‘car’’), from the 
Sabine curis (“‘spear’’) and from Cures, the city. 

* More than an entire line is supplied here, following 
Kiessling’s suggestion. See critical note. 

8 For chaps. 51-52 ef. Livy i. 14, 1-3. 


457 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> > ~ Δ / » 5» > ~ ~ 
ἐξ ἐπιβουλῆς, ἣν συνέστησαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ “αουινιατῶν 
ε / 
οἱ κορυφαιότατοι συμφρονήσαντες ἀπὸ τοιαύτης 
I ας, δ ~ on 
αἰτίας. τῶν ἑταίρων τινὲς τοῦ Τατίου λῃστήριον 
> / ~ 
ἐξαγαγόντες εἰς τὴν “αουινιατῶν χώραν χρήματά 
> ~ ΄ 
τε αὐτῶν ἥρπασαν πολλὰ καὶ βοσκημάτων ἀπήλασαν 
> ͵ ~ > 2 4 
ἀγέλας, τῶν δ᾽ ἐπιβοηθούντων ots μὲν ἀπέκτειναν, 
a > > / > / \ / 
ous δ᾽ ἐτραυμάτισαν. ἀφικομένης δὲ πρεσβείας 
παρὰ τῶν ἠδικημένων καὶ τὰ δίκαια ἀπαιτούσης ὁ 
« ~ 
μὲν Ῥωμύλος ἐδικαίωσε παραδοῦναι τοὺς δράσαντας 
- 3 A ~ 
τοῖς ἀδικηθεῖσιν ἀπάγειν, ὁ δὲ Τάτιος τῶν ἑταίρων 
περιεχόμενος οὐκ ἠξίου πρὸ δίκης τινὰς ὑπ᾽ ἐχθρῶν 
Μ θ 1 A ~ λί », «ς \ / ὃ 4, 
ἄγεσθαι" Kat ταῦτα πολίτας ὄντας ὑπὸ ἕένων - δικά- 
> b] - > ΄ A > ~ / 
ζεσθαι δ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐκέλευε τοὺς ἠδικῆσθαι λέγοντας 
δ: οἷς ΄ > / ς \ \ / 2991 
εἰς Ρώμην ἀφικομένους. ot μὲν δὴ πρέσβεις οὐδὲν 
~ ~ > /, 
εὑρόμενοι τῶν δικαίων ἀγανακτοῦντες ἀπήεσαν, ἀκο- 
- ~ \ > ~ 
λουθήσαντες δ᾽ αὐτοῖς τῶν Σαβίνων τινὲς ὑπ᾽ ὀργῆς, 
\ ε / ε / \ \ 
ἐσκηνωμένοις παρὰ τὴν ὁδόν (ἑσπέρα yap αὐτοὺς 
/ \ / / 
κατέλαβεν) ἐπιτίθενται καθεύδουσι καὶ τά TE χρή- 
~ > A 
pat αὐτοὺς ἀφαιροῦνται Kal ὁπόσους ἐν ταῖς κοΐταις 
“ \ a “ 
ἔτι κατέλαβον ἀποσφάττουσιν, ὅσοις δὲ ταχεῖα τῆς 
~ ~ > / ‘ ~ 
ἐπιβουλῆς αὐτῶν αἴσθησις ἐγένετο καὶ τοῦ δια- 
A / > ~ A 
φυγεῖν δύναμις εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἀφικνοῦνται. μετὰ 
΄- ΝΜ / / > / So? 
τοῦτο ἔκ τε Aaovwiov πρέσβεις ἀφικόμενοι καὶ ἐξ 
~ / ~ / 
ἄλλων πόλεων συχνῶν κατηγόρουν THs παρανομίας 
> \ ΄ ~ 
Kal πόλεμον παρήγγελλον εἰ μὴ τεύξονται τῆς 
δίκης. 
/ σ > \ 
LIT. ἹΡωμύλῳ μὲν οὖν δεινόν, ὥσπερ ἦν, TO 
΄ A / 
περὶ τοὺς πρεσβευτὰς ἐφαίνετο πάθος καὶ ταχείας 


1 ἄγεσθαι Bb: ἐνάγεσθαι ABa; ἀπάγεσθαι Bicheler. 


458 


BOOK IT. 51, 1-52, 1 


having lost his life as the result of a plot which the 
principal men of Lavinium formed against him. 
The occasion for the plot was this. Some friends of 
Tatius had led out a band of robbers into the terri- 
tory of the Lavinians, where they seized a great 
many of their effects and drove away their herds of 
cattle, killing or wounding those who came to the 
rescue. Upon the arrival of an embassy from the 
injured to demand satisfaction, Romulus decided 
that those who had done the injury should be de- 
livered up for punishment to those they had wronged. 
Tatius, however, espousing the cause of his friends, 
would not consent that any persons should be 
taken into custody by their enemies before trial, 
and particularly Roman citizens by outsiders, 
but ordered those who complained that they had 
been injured to come to Rome and proceed against 
the others according to law. The ambassadors, 
accordingly, having failed to obtain any satisfaction, 
went away full of resentment; and some of the 
Sabines, incensed at their action, followed them and 
set upon them while they were asleep in their tents, 
which they had pitched near the road when evening 
overtook them, and not only robbed them of their 
money, but cut the throats of all they found still 
in their beds; those, however, who perceived the 
plot promptly and were able to make their escape 
got back to their city. After this ambassadors came 
both from Lavinium and from many other cities, 
complaining of this lawless deed and threatening war 
if they should not obtain justice. 

11. This violence committed against the ambas- 
sadors appeared to Romulus, as indeed it was, a 


499 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


5» / ὃ ’ e ς ~ A λ ΄ 1 
ἀφοσιώσεως δεόμενον, ὡς ἱεροῦ καταλελυμένου 
,ὔ ‘ 3 \ ” / e Ss > 
νόμου. καὶ οὐδὲν ἔτι διαμελλήσας, ws εἶδεν ὀλιγω- 
~ > ~ 
ροῦντα τὸν Τάτιον αὐτὸς συνέλαβε τοὺς ἐνόχους τῷ 
ἄγει καὶ δήσας παρέδωκε τοῖς πρεσβευταῖς ἀπάγειν. 
Τατίῳ δὲ θυμός τε εἰσέρχεται τῆς ὕβρεως, ἣν ὑπὸ 
~ ~ A 
τοῦ συνάρχοντος ἠτιᾶτο ὑβρίσθαι κατὰ τὴν παρά- 
~ a ~ ~ > Ss 
δοσιν τῶν ἀνδρῶν, Kat οἶκτος τῶν ἀπαγομένων (ἦν 
~ ~ » i 
yap καὶ συγγενής τις αὐτοῦ τῷ ayer ἔνοχος) Kal 
᾽ ͵ A / > \ > / 4A 
αὐτίκα τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀναλαβὼν ἐβοήθει διὰ 
/ > « ~ ” \ / \ 
τάχους ἐν ὁδῷ τε ὄντας τοὺς πρέσβεις καταλαβὼν 
/ / ~ 
ἀφείλετο τοὺς ἀπαγομένους. χρόνου δὲ οὐ πολλοῦ 
: , ε 7 , “ € 7 
διελθόντος, ὡς μέν τινές φασιν, ἅμα “Ῥωμύλῳ 
\ ͵ “a 
παραγενόμενος εἰς TO Aaoviviov ἕνεκα θυσίας, ἣν 
~ ~ ~ / ~ 
ἔδει τοῖς πατρῴοις θεοῖς ὑπὲρ τῆς πόλεως θῦσαι 
~ / = >) A ~ ς 7 
τοὺς βασιλεῖς, συστάντων ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν τῶν ἑταίρων 
͵ ~ » 
τε καὶ γένει προσηκόντων τοῖς ἀνῃρημένοις πρέ- 
> ~ ~ ~ ~ 7 \ 
σβεσιν ἐπὶ τῶν βωμῶν ταῖς μαγειρικαῖς σφαγίσι Kal 
- A > ΄ 
τοῖς βουπόροις ὀβελοῖς παιόμενος ἀποθνήσκει. ὡς 
>) ς 4 / / » A « 4 
δ᾽ οἱ περὶ Λικώνιον γράφουσιν οὐ peta “Ῥωμύλου 
, ¢ ~ > 
παραγενόμενος οὐδὲ χάριν ἱερῶν, ἀλλὰ μόνος ὡς 
πείσων τοὺς ἀδικηθέντας ἀφεῖναι τοῖς δεδρακόσι 
~ / > A ~ A 
τὴν ὀργήν, ἀγανακτήσαντος τοῦ πλήθους ἐπὶ TH μὴ 
/ / \ + ¢ a « / 
παραδίδοσθαί σφισι τοὺς ἄνδρας, ws 6 τε Ῥωμύλος 
, ~ ¢ / wv 4 ‘\ 
ἐδικαίωσε Kal ἡ TOV “Ῥωμαίων ἔκρινε βουλή, Kat 
~ - \ ~ « 
τῶν προσηκόντων τοῖς τεθνεῶσι κατὰ πλῆθος ὁρμη- 
\ »” - \ > 
σάντων ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, ἀδύνατος ὧν ἔτι διαφυγεῖν THY ἐκ 
͵ > - > 4 
χειρὸς δίκην, καταλευσθεὶς ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀποθνήσκει. 


! Biicheler: καταλυομένου Ο. 





1 Licinius Macer. 


460 


BOOK II. 52, 1-4 


terrible crime and one calling for speedy expiation, 
since it had been in violation of a sacred law; and 
finding that Tatius was making light of it, he himself, 
without further delay, caused those who had been 
guilty of the outrage to be seized and delivered up in 
chains to the ambassadors to be led away. But Tatius 
not only was angered at the indignity which he 
complained he had received from his colleague in 
the delivering up of the men, but was also eed 
with compassion for those who were being led 
away (for one of the guilty persons was actually a 
relation of his); and immediately, taking his sol- 
diers with him, he went in haste to their assistance, 
and overtaking the ambassadors on the road, he 
took the prisoners from them. But not long after- 
wards, as some say, when he had gone with Romulus 
to Lavinium in order to perform a sacrifice which 
it was necessary for the kings to offer to the ancestral! 
gods for the prosperity of the city, the friends and 
relations of the ambassadors who had been murdered, 
having conspired against him, slew him at the altar 
with the knives and spits used in cutting up and 
roasting the oxen. But Licinius! writes that he 
did not go with Romulus nor, indeed, on account 
of any sacrifices, but that he went alone, with the 
intention of persuading those who had received 
the injuries to forgive the authors of them, and that 
when the people became angry because the men were 
not delivered up to them in accordance with the 
decision both of Romulus and of the Roman senate, 
and the relations of the slain men rushed upon him 
in great numbers, he was no longer able to escape 
summary justice and was stoned to death by them. 


461 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ὃ Τάτιος μὲν οὖν τοιαύτης τελευτῆς ἔτυχε τρία μὲν 
” / « ΄ , \ / 
ἔτη πολεμήσας “Ῥωμύλῳ, πέντε δὲ συνάρξας, 
> > « / \ > 7ὔ -“ \ 
θάπτεται δ᾽ εἰς “Ῥώμην κομισθεὶς ἐντίμῳ ταφῇ Kat 
χοὰς αὐτῷ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐνιαυτὸν ἡ πόλις ἐπιτελεῖ 
δημοσίᾳ. 
1111. Ῥωμύλος δὲ μόνος ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν τὸ δεύ- 
τερον καταστὰς τό τε ἄγος ἀφοσιοῦται τὸ περὶ τοὺς 
~ > 
πρέσβεις γενόμενον προειπὼν τοῖς ἐργασαμένοις TO 
μύσος ὕδατος εἴργεσθαι καὶ πυρός (ἐπεφεύγεσαν 
~ “ ~ 
yap ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἅπαντες ἅμα τῷ τὸν Τάτιον 
ἀποθανεῖν) καὶ τῶν “αουινιατῶν τοὺς συστάντας 
> \ A / / ‘ > ΄ 
ἐπὶ τὸν Τάτιον δικαστηρίῳ παραδοὺς ἐκδοθέντας 
Ὧν ὁ. 4 = , > \ , Ὁ 7 j 
ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως, ἐπειδὴ δικαιότερα ἐδόκουν λέγειν 
7 - » ~ 
τὰ βίαια τιμωρησάμενοι τοῖς βιαίοις, ἀπέλυσε τῆς 
~ ZS, | \ 
2 αἰτίας. ταῦτα διαπραξάμενος ἐπὶ τὴν Φιδηναίων 
ἐστράτευσε πόλιν ἀπὸ τετταράκοντα σταδίων τῆς 
\ / 
“Ρώμης κειμένην, μεγάλην te καὶ πολυάνθρωπον 
5 > / \ > 4, (6og > a 
οὖσαν τότε. ἀγομένης yap εἰς τὴν “Ῥώμην ἀγορᾶς 
- Δ a 
ἐν σκάφαις ποταμηγοῖς, ἣν Kpovoropepivor! πιεζο- 
μένοις ὑπὸ λιμοῦ “Ρωμαίοις ἀπέστειλαν, ὠσάμενοι 
\ AAO + le \ / c D ὃ ~ , 
κατὰ πλῆθος ἐπὶ τὰς σκάφας ot Φιδηναῖοι τήν τε 
~ > / A ~ 
ἀγορὰν διήρπασαν καὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων twas τῶν 
/ / 
ἐπιβοηθούντων ἀπέκτειναν αἰτούμενοί τε δίκας οὐχ 
sm ~ © ¢ / (eee 4 
3 ὑπεῖχον. ἐφ᾽ ols ἀγανακτῶν ὁ “Pwpwdros ἐνέβαλεν 
~ ~ a \ / 
εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν πολλῇ στρατιᾷ καὶ γενόμενος 
\ > / A 
ἀφθόνου λείας ἐγκρατὴς ἀπάγειν μὲν παρεσκευά- 
ζετο τὴν δύναμιν, ἐπεξελθόντων δὲ τῶν Φιδηναίων 


1 Ambrosch: κρουστομέριοι BbR, κροστομέρειοι Ba. 
462 


BOOK II. 52, 5-53, 3 


Such was the end to which Tatius came, after he 
had warred against Romulus for three years and 
had been his colleague for five. His body was 
brought to Rome, where it was given honourable 
burial; and the city offers public libations to him 
every year. 

LITI. But! Romulus, now established for the 
second time as sole ruler, expiated the crime com- 
mitted against the ambassadors by forbidding those 
who had perpetrated the outrage the use of fire and 
water ; for upon the death of Tatius they had al) fled 
from the city. After that, he brought to trial the 
Lavinians who had conspired against Tatius and who 
had been delivered up by their own city, and when 
they seemed to plead, with considerable justice. that 
they had but avenged violence with violence, he freed 
them of the charge. After he had attended to these 
matters, he led out his army against the city of 
Fidenae, which was situated forty stades from Rome 
and was at that time both large and populous. 
For on an occasion when the Romans were oppressed 
by famine and provisions which the people of 
Crustumerium had sent to them were being brought 
down the river in boats, the Fidenates crowded 
aboard the boats in great numbers, seized the 
provisions and killed some of the men who defended 
them, and when called upon to make satisfaction, 
they refused to do so. Romulus, incensed at this, 
made an incursion into their territory with a con- 
siderable force, and having possessed himself of a 
great quantity of booty, was preparing to lead his 
army home; but when the Fidenates came out 


1Cf. Livy i. 14, 4-11. 
463 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


συνάπτει πρὸς αὐτοὺς μάχην. καρτεροῦ δὲ ἀγῶνος 
γενομένου καὶ πολλῶν πεσόντων ἀφ᾽ ἑκατέρων 
ἡσσηθέντες οἱ Φιδηναῖοι τρέπονται πρὸς φυγήν, o 
δ᾽ ἐκ ποδὸς συνακολουθῶν αὐτοῖς συνεισπίπτει τοῖς 
φεύγουσιν εἰς τὸ τεῖχος. ἁλούσης δὲ τῆς πόλεως 
ἐξ ἐφόδου τιμωρησάμενος ἐξ αὐτῶν ὀλίγους καὶ 
φυλακὴν ἐν τῇ πόλει τριακοσίων ἀνδρῶν καταλιπὼν 
τῆς τε χώρας μοῖραν ἀποτεμόμενος, ἣν τοῖς σφετέ- 
pos διεῖλεν, ἀποικίαν ἐποίησε Ρωμαίων καὶ ταύτην 
τὴν πόλιν. ἦν δὲ AABavav ἀπόκτισις κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν 
οἰκισθεῖσα Νωμεντῷ τε καὶ Κρουστομερίᾳ χρόνον, 
τριῶν ἀδελφῶν τῆς ἀποικίας ἡγησαμένων, ὧν ὃ 
πρεσβύτατος τὴν Φιδήνην ἔκτισεν. 

LIV. Μετὰ τοῦτον τὸν πόλεμον ἐπὶ Καμερίνους 
ἐστράτευσεν ἐπιθεμένους ῖ τοῖς παρὰ σφίσιν ἐποί- 
κοις, καθ᾽ ὃν χρόνον ἔκαμνεν ἡ Ρωμαίων πόλις 
ὑπὸ νόσου λοιμικῆς ἡἧ δὴ μάλιστα ἐπαρθέντες οἱ 
Καμερῖνοι καὶ νομίσαντες ἄρδην τὸ “Ρωμαίων 
διαφθαρήσεσθαι γένος ὑπὸ τῆς συμφορᾶς τοὺς μὲν 
ἀπέκτειναν τῶν ἐποίκων, τοὺς δ᾽ ἐξέβαλον. ἀνθ᾽ 
ὧν τιμωρούμενος αὐτοὺς ὁ ἱΡωμύλος, ἐπειδὴ τὸ 
δεύτερον ἐκράτησε τῆς πόλεως, τοὺς μὲν αἰτίους 
τῆς ἀποστάσεως ἀπέκτεινε, τοῖς δὲ στρατιώταις 
διαρπάσαι τὴν πόλιν ἐφῆκε, τῆς τε χώρας τὴν 
ἡμίσειαν ἀποτεμόμενος ἔξω τῆς πρότερον τοῖς 
κληρούχοις δοθείσης καὶ φρουρὰν ἀξιόχρεων κατα- 
λιπών, ὡς μηδὲν ἔτι παρακινῆσαι τοὺς ἔνδον, 
ἀπῆγε τὴν δύναμιν. ἐκ ταύτης τῆς στρατείας καὶ ὃ 
δεύτερον θρίαμβον κατήγαγε καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν λαφύρων 

1 Biicheler: ἐπιτιθεμένους O. 2xai Bb: om. BaR. 


464 


BOOK II. 53, 3-54, 2 


against him, he gave them battle. After a severe 
struggle, in which many fell on both sides, the 
enemy were defeated and put to flight, and Romu- 
lus, following close upon their heels, rushed inside 
the walls along with the fugitives. When the city 
had been taken at the first assault, he punished 
a few of the citizens, and left a guard of three 
hundred men there; and taking from the inhabitants 
a part of their territory, which he divided among 
his own people, he made this city also a Roman 
colony. It had been founded by the Albans at 
the same time with Nomentum and Crustumerium, 
three brothers having been the leaders of the 
colony, of whom the eldest built Fidenae. 

LIV. After this war Romulus undertook another 
against the Camerini, who had attacked the Roman 
colonists in their midst while the city of Rome was 
suffering from a pestilence ; it was this situation in 
particular that encouraged the Camerini, and be- 
lieving that the Roman nation would be totally 
destroyed by the calamity, they killed some of the 
colonists and expelled the rest. In revenge for this 
Romulus, after he had a second time made himself 
master of the city, put to death the authors of the 
revolt and permitted his soldiers to plunder the city ; 
and he also took away half the land besides that which 
had been previously granted to the Roman settlers. 
And having left a garrison in the city sufficient to 
quell any future uprising of the inhabitants, he 
departed with his forces. As the result of this 
expedition he celebrated a second triumph, and 
out of the spoils he dedicated a chariot and four in 


465 
VOL. I. R 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τέθριππον χαλκοῦν ἀνέθηκε τῷ ᾿Ηφαίστῳ καὶ 
παρ᾽ αὐτῷ τὴν ἰδίαν ἀνέστησεν ' εἰκόνα ἐπιγράψας 
᾿Ελληνικοῖς γράμμασι τὰς ἑαυτοῦ πράξεις. τρίτος 
αὐτῷ συνέστη πόλεμος πρὸς ἔθνους Τυρρηνικοῦ τὴν 
μεγίστην ἰσχὺν ἔχουσαν 2 τότε πόλιν, ἣ καλεῖται 
μὲν Οὐιοί,) ἀπέχει δὲ τῆς Ῥώμης ἀμφὶ τοὺς ἑκατὸν 
σταδίους, κεῖται δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὑψηλοῦ σκοπέλου καὶ περιρ- 
ρῶγος μέγεθος ἔχουσα ὅσον θῆναι. ἐποιήσαντο 
δ᾽ οἱ Οὐιεντανοὶ τοῦ πολέμου πρόφασιν τὴν τῆς 
Φιδήνης ἅλωσιν καὶ πρέσβεις ἀποστείλαντες ἐκέ- 
λευον Ῥωμαίοις ἐξάγειν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως τὴν 
φρουρὰν καὶ τὴν χώραν, ἣν κατεῖχον ἀφελόμενοι 
τοὺς Φιδηναίους, ἀποδιδόναι τοῖς ἐξ ἀρχῆς κυρίοις. 
ὡς δ᾽ οὐκ ἔπειθον ἐλάσαντες πολλῇ στρατιᾷ 
πλησίον τῆς Φιδήνης ἐν ἀπόπτῳ τίθενται τὸν 
χάρακα. προεγνωκὼς δὲ αὐτῶν τὴν ἔξοδον ὁ 
“Ῥωμύλος ἐξεληλύθει τὴν κρατίστην δύναμιν ἔχων 
καὶ ἦν ἐν τῇ πόλει τῶν Φιδηναίων εὐτρεπής. ἐπεὶ 
δ᾽ ἕτοιμα τὰ πρὸς τὸν ἀγῶνα ἦν, ἀμφότεροι προελ- 
θόντες εἰς τὸ πεδίον ἐμάχοντο καὶ διέμειναν ἄχρι 
πολλῆς ὥρας ἐκθύμως ἀγωνιζόμενοι, ἕως 4 ἡ νὺξ 
ἐπιλαβοῦσα διέκρινεν αὐτοὺς ἴσους κατὰ τὸν ἀγῶνα 
γενομένους. καὶ ταύτην μὲν τὴν μάχην οὕτως 
ἠγωνίσαντο" 

LV. ἑτέρας δὲ μάχης μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ γενομένης, 
ἐνίκων οἱ Ῥωμαῖοι σοφίᾳ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος ὄρος τι 
καταλαβομένου νύκτωρ οὐ πολὺν τοῦ στρατοπέδου 
τῶν πολεμίων τόπον ἀπέχον καὶ λοχίσαντος ἐν 


1 Jacoby: ἔστησεν O. 


466 


BOOK II. 54, 2-55, 1 


bronze to Vulcan, and near it he set up his own statue 
with an inscription in Greek characters setting forth 
his deeds. The! third war Romulus engaged in was 
against the most powerful city of the Tyrrhenian 
race at that time, called Veii, distant from Rome 
about a hundred stades ; it is situated on a high and 
craggy rock and is as large as Athens. The Veientes 
made the taking of Fidenae the pretext for this war, 
and sending ambassadors, they bade the Romans 
withdraw their garrison from that city and restore 
to its original possessors the territory they had taken 
from them and were now occupying. And when 
their demand was not heeded, they took the field 
with a great army and established their camp in a 
conspicuous place near Fidenae. Romulus, however, 
having received advance information of their march, 
had set out with the flower of his army and lay ready 
at Fidenae to receive them. When all their pre- 
parations were made for the struggle, both armies 
advanced into the plain and came to grips, and they 
continued fighting with great ardour for a long 
time, till the coming on of night parted them, after 
they had proved themselves evenly matched in the 
struggle. This was the course of the first battle. 
LY. But in a second battle, which was fought 
not long afterwards, the Romans were victorious 
as the result of the strategy of their general, who 
had occupied in the night a certain height not far 
distant from the enemy’s camp and placed there in 


1 For chap. 54, 3-55, 6 ef. Livy i. 15, 1-5. 





μεγίστην ἰσχὺν ἔχουσαν Kiessling : μεγίστην ἰσχύουσαν AB, 
. OR ot Sylburg: coi A, ἴοι B. * ἕως O: τέως Jacoby, 


467 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


αὐτῷ τὴν ἀκμαιοτάτην τῶν ὕστερον ἀφικομένων 
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἱππέων τε καὶ πεζῶν δύναμιν. 
᾿ συνελθόντων δ᾽ εἰς τὸ πεδίον ἀμφοτέρων καὶ τὸν 
αὐτὸν ἀγωνιζομένων τρόπον, ἐπειδὴ τὸ σύνθημα 
ὁ ἹΡωμύλος ἦρε τοῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους, ἀλαλάξαντες 
οἱ λοχῶντες ἔθεον ἐπὶ τοὺς Οὐιεντανοὺς ἐκ τῶν 
κατόπιν καὶ προσπεσόντες ἀνθρώποις μεμοχθηκόσιν 
αὐτοὶ ἀκμῆτες ὄντες οὐ σὺν πολλῷ τρέπουσι πόνῳ." 
τῶν δ᾽ ὀλίγοι μέν τινες ἀποθνήσκουσι κατὰ τὴν 
μάχην, οἱ δὲ πλείους εἰς τὸν Τέβεριν ποταμόν (pet? 
δὲ παρὰ τὴν Φιδήνην) ῥίψαντες ἑαυτούς, ὡς δια- 
νηξόμενοι τὸ ῥεῦμα, διεφθάρησαν. τραυματίαι γὰρ 
ὄντες καὶ βαρεῖς ὑπὸ κόπου ἀδύνατοι ἐγένοντο δια- 
νήξασθαι - οἱ δὲ καὶ ἀπειρίᾳ τοῦ νεῖν, οὐ προϊδόντες ,3 
ὑπὸ τοῦ δεινοῦ τὴν γνώμην ἐπιταραχθέντες, ἐν ταῖς 
δίναις ἀπώλλυντο. εἰ μὲν οὖν συνέγνωσαν ἑαυτοῖς 
Οὐιεντανοὶ κακῶς τὰ πρῶτα βεβουλευμένοις * καὶ τὸ 
λοιπὸν ἦγον ἡσυχίαν οὐδενὸς ἂν ἔτι μείζονος ἀπέ- 
λαυσαν κακοῦ, νῦν δὲ ἀναμαχεῖσθαί τε τὰ πρότερα 
σφάλματα ἐλπίσαντες καὶ εἰ μείζονι παρασκευῇ ἐπι- 
βάλοιεν ῥᾳδίως ἐπικρατήσειν οἰόμενοι τῷ πολέμῳ, 
πολλῇ στρατιᾷ τῇ τε ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς πόλεως κατα- 
γραφείσῃ καὶ τῇ" ἐκ τῶν ὁμοεθνῶν κατὰ φιλίαν 
παραγενομένῃ τὸ δεύτερον ἐπὶ τοὺς “Ῥωμαίους 
ἐλαύνουσι καὶ γίνεται πάλιν αὐτῶν μάχη καρτερὰ 


lod σὺν πολλῷ τρέπουσι πόνῳ Sylburg, Casaubon, οὐ σὺν 
πόνῳ τρέπουσι χρόνῳ Reiske : οὐ σὺν πολλῷ τρέπουσι χρόνῳ O, 
Jacoby. 

2 ῥεῖ Kiessling, ἐκρεῖ Steph. : «xe O. 

8 προιδόντες ABa: προειδότες Bb. 


468 


BOOK II. 55, 1-4 


ambush the choicest both of the horse and foot that 
had come to him from Rome since the last action. 
The two armies met in the plain and fought in the 
same manner as before; but when Romulus raised 
the signal to the troops that lay in ambush on the 
height, these, raising the battle cry, rushed upon the 
Veientes from the rear, and being themselves fresh 
while the enemy were fatigued, they put them to 
flight with no great difficulty. Some few of them 
were slain in battle, but the greater part, throwing 
themselves into the Tiber, which flows by Fidenae, 
with the intention of swimming across the river, 
were drowned ; for, being wounded and spent with 
labour, they were unable to swim across, while 
others, who did not know how to swim and had not 
looked ahead, having lost all presence of mind in 
face of the danger, perished in the eddies of the 
river. If, now, the Veientes had realized that their 
first plans had been ill-advised and had remained 
quiet after this, they would have met with no greater 
misfortune ; but, as it was, hoping to repair their 
former losses and believing that if they attacked with 
a larger force they would easily conquer in the war, 
they set out a second time against the Romans with 
a large army, consisting both of the levy from the 
city itself and of others of the same race! who in 
virtue of their league came to their assistance. 
Upon this, another severe battle was fought near 


12,6. Etruscans. 





- : βεβουλευμένοις Bb: βεβουλευμένοι Ba, βουλευόμενοι R. 
5 τῇ added by Kiessling. 


469 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τῆς Φιδήνης πλησίον, ἣν ἐνίκων “Ῥωμαῖοι πολλοὺς 
μὲν ἀποκτείναντες τῶν Οὐιεντανῶν, ἔτι δὲ πλείους 
αἰχμαλώτους λαβόντες. ἑάλω δὲ καὶ ὃ χάραξ αὐτῶν 
μεστὸς ὧν χρημάτων τε καὶ ὅπλων καὶ ἀνδραπόδων, 
καὶ σκάφαι ποταμηγοὶ γέμουσαι πολλῆς ἀγορᾶς 
ἐλήφθησαν, ἐν αἷς 6 τῶν αἰχμαλώτων ὄχλος εἰς 
τὴν Ρώμην κατήγετο διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ. οὗτος 
κατήχθη " τρίτος ὑπὸ “Ῥωμύλου θρίαμβος μακρῷ 
τῶν προτέρων ἐκπρεπέστερος. καὶ μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ 
Οὐιεντανῶν πρεσβείας ἀφικομένης περὶ διαλύσεως 
τοῦ πολέμου καὶ συγγνώμην τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων 
ἀξιούσης λαβεῖν δίκας 6 Ῥωμύλος αὐτοῖς ἐπιτίθησι 
τάσδε: χώραν τε παραδοῦναι “Ῥωμαίοις τὴν προσ- 
εχῆ τῷ TeBéper, τοὺς καλουμένους ᾿πτὰ πάγους, 
καὶ τῶν ἁλῶν 5 ἀποστῆναι τῶν παρὰ ταῖς ἐκβολαῖς 
τοῦ ποταμοῦ, τοῦ δὲ μηδὲν ἔτι νεωτερίσαι τὸ πιστὸν 
} παρασχεῖν ὅμηρα πεντήκοντα ἀγαγόντας. ὕὑπο- 
μεινάντων δὲ Οὐιεντανῶν ἅπαντα ταῦτα σπονδὰς 
ποιησάμενος πρὸς αὐτοὺς εἰς ἑκατὸν ἔτη στήλαις 
ἐνεχάραξε τὰς ὁμολογίας. τῶν δ᾽ αἰχμαλώτων 
τοὺς μὲν ἀπιέναι βουλομένους ἀφῆκεν ἄνευ λύτρων, 
τοὺς δ᾽ αὐτοῦ μένειν προαιρουμένους πολλῷ πλείους 
ὄντας τῶν ἑτέρων πολίτας ποιησάμενος ταῖς φρά- 
τραις ἐπιδιεῖλε καὶ κλήρους αὐτοῖς προσένειμε ὃ ἐπὶ 
τάδε τοῦ Τεβέριος. 

LVI. Οὗτοι συνέστησαν οἱ πόλεμοι “Ρωμύλῳ 
λόγου καὶ μνήμης ἄξιοι. τοῦ δὲ μηδὲν ἔτι τῶν 


1 κατήχθη Jacoby: ἤχθη O. 
2 ἁλῶν Gelenius, Sylburg: ἄλλων Ο, 


410 


BOOK II. 55, 4-56, 1 


Fidenae, in which the Romans were victorious, after 
killing many of the Veientes and taking more of 
them prisoners. [Even their camp was taken, which 
was full of money, arms and slaves, and likewise 
their boats, which were laden with great store of 
provisions ; and in these the multitude of prisoners 
were carried down the river to Rome. This was 
the third triumph that Romulus celebrated, and 
it was much more magnificent than either of the 
former. And when, not long afterwards, ambas- 
sadors arrived from the Veientes to seek an end 
to the war and to ask pardon for their offences, 
Romulus imposed the following penalties upon them : 
to deliver up to the Romans the country adjacent 
to the Tiber, called the Seven Districts,! and to 
abandon the salt-works near the mouth of the 
river, and also to bring fifty hostages as a pledge 
that they would attempt no uprising in the future. 
When the Veientes submitted to all these demands, 
he made a treaty with them for one hundred years 
and engraved the terms of it on pillars. He then 
dismissed without ransom all the prisoners who 
desired to return home; but those who preferred to 
remain in Rome—and these were far more numerous 
than the others—he made citizens, distributing 
them among the curiae and assigning to them allot- 
ments of land on this side of the Tiber. 

LVI. These? are the memorable wars which 
Romulus waged. His failure to subdue any more 


1 Septem Pagi. 2 Cf. Livy i. 16, 1-4. 





8 τοὺς after προσένειμε deloted by Jacoby ; Reiske emended 
to τῆς. 
47] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


λ / 2A ~ ε , - e \ ~ 
πλησίον ἐθνῶν ὑπαγαγέσθαι ταχεῖα ἡ τελευτὴ τοῦ 
4 ~ ες > / > ~ A / 
βίου συμβᾶσα ἔτι ἀκμάζοντι αὐτῷ τὰ πολέμια 

/ > 3. F / JA \ e \ 
πράττειν ev αἰτίᾳ γενέσθαι ἔδοξε" περὶ ἧς πολλοὶ 
/ / A / € \ 
παραδέδονται λόγοι καὶ διάφοροι. οἱ μὲν οὖν. 
μυθωδέστερα τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ ποιοῦντες ἐκκλησιά- 
ζοντά φασιν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ στρατοπέδου ζόφου κατα- 
σκήψαντος ἐξ αἰθρίας καὶ χειμῶνος μεγάλου καταρ- 
ραγέντος ἀφανῆ γενέσθαι καὶ πεπιστεύκασιν ὑπὸ 

~ \ uv \ + > 7 € A 
τοῦ πατρὸς Ἄρεος τὸν ἄνδρα ἀνηρπάσθαι: ot δὲ 
~ 90, ~ 
τὰ πιθανώτερα ' γράφοντες πρὸς τῶν ἰδίων πολιτῶν 
λέγουσιν αὐτὸν ἀποθανεῖν. αἰτίαν δὲ τῆς ἀναιρέ- 
= Μ ~ « 7 
σεως αὐτοῦ φέρουσι τήν τε ἄφεσιν τῶν ὁμήρων, 
οὗς παρὰ Οὐιεντανῶν ἔλαβεν, ἄνευ κοινῆς γνώμης 
γενομένην παρὰ τὸ εἰωθός, καὶ τὸΞ μηκέτι τὸν 
αὐτὸν προσφέρεσθαι τρόπον τοῖς ἀρχαίοις 3 πολί- 
΄ > ~ 
ταις Kal τοῖς προσγράφοις, ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν ἐν τιμῇ 
~ > ~ 
πλείονι ἄγειν, τῶν δ᾽ ἐπεισαχθέντων ὑπερορᾶν, τό 
τε ὠμὸν αὐτοῦ τὸ περὶ τὰς τιμωρίας τῶν ἐξ- 
«ς \ 
αμαρτανόντων * (Ῥωμαίων yap twas ἐπὶ λῃστείᾳ 
΄--- / »” 5 ~ 
τῶν πλησιοχώρων κατηγορηθέντας οὔτε ἀφανεῖς 
ἄνδρας οὔτε ὀλίγους ἐκέλευσεν ὦσαι κατὰ τοῦ 
~ / 
κρημνοῦ τὴν δίκην αὐτὸς μόνος δικάσας), μάλιστα 
\ 4 \ ” \ 52 7 > 29 7 \ 
δὲ ὅτι βαρὺς ἤδη Kal αὐθάδης εἶναι ἐδόκει Kal 
~ \ 
τὴν ἀρχὴν οὐκέτι βασιλικῶς ἀλλὰ τυραννικώτερον 
> ,ὔ 
ἐξάγειν. διὰ ταύτας δὴ λέγουσι τὰς αἰτίας συστάν- 
~ ~ ‘ / 
τας ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ τοὺς πατρικίους βουλεῦσαι τὸν φόνον, 
1 πιθανώτερα Α (3), Reiske: πιθανώτατα B. 


2 τὸ Steph.: om. ΑΒ. 
8 ἀρχαίοις (or ἀρχαιοτέροις) Reiske: ἀρχαιοτάτοις O. 


412 


BOOK II. 56, 1-4 


of the neighbouring nations seems to have been due to 
his sudden death, which happened while he was still 
in the vigour of his age for warlike achievements. 
There are many different stories concerning it. Those 
who give a rather fabulous account of his life say 
that while he was haranguing his men in the camp, 
sudden darkness rushed down out of a clear sky 
and a violent storm burst, after which he was 
nowhere to be seen; and these writers believe that 
he was caught up into heaven by his father, Mars. 
But those who write the more plausible accounts 
say that he was killed by his own people; and the 
reason they allege for his murder is that he released 
without the common consent, contrary to custom, 
the hostages he had taken from the Veientes, and that 
he no longer comported himself in the same manner 
toward the original citizens and toward those who 
were enrolled later, but showed greater honour 
to the former and slighted the latter, and also be- 
cause of his great cruelty in the punishment of de- 
linquents (for instance, he had ordered a group of 
Romans who were accused of brigandage against 
the neighbouring peoples to be hurled down the 
precipice * after he had sat alone in judgment upon 
them, although they were neither of mean birth nor 
few in number), but chiefly because he now seemed 
to be harsh and arbitrary and to be exercising his 
power more like a tyrant than a king. For these 
reasons, they say, the patricians formed a conspiracy 
against him and resolved to slay him; and having 


1 The Tarpeian rock. 


ER ES GE SS ew SP Ask OPT RY Ween Is SOT Pee ee τε 
*xai αὔθαδες after ἐξαμαρτανόντων deleted by Biicheler 

(note καὶ αὐθάδης four lines below). 
473 


lor) 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


A \ ἢ. oS, > ~ / \ ld 
πρᾶξαι δὲ τὸ ἔργον ἐν TH βουλευτηρίῳ καὶ διελόν- 
\ ~ \ ‘ ΄ - \ ~ ‘ 
Tas TO σῶμα κατὰ μέρη χάριν τοῦ μὴ φανῆναι Tov 
νεκρὸν ἐξελθεῖν κρύπτοντας ὑπὸ ταῖς περιβολαῖς 
ὅσον ἕκαστος εἶχεν αὐτοῦ μέρος καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο γῇ 
/ A \ > uA ¢ > > / \ 
κρύψαι κατὰ τὸ ἀφανές. οἱ δ᾽ ἐκκλησιάζοντα μὲν 
αὐτόν φασιν ὑπὸ τῶν νεοπολιτῶν “Ῥωμαίων ἀναι- 
΄- > ~ > > \ ~ / > a 
ρεθῆναι, ἐπιχειρῆσαι δ᾽ αὐτοὺς τῷ φόνῳ καθ᾽ ὃν 
/ ¢ LA 1 \ A / > 4 ὃ ὃ 
χρόνον ἡ ζάλη καὶ τὸ σκότος ἐγένετο διασκεδα- 
σθέντος ἐκ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τοῦ δήμου καὶ μονωθέντος 
τῆς φυλακῆς τοῦ ἡγεμόνος. διὰ τοῦτο γοῦν φασι 
τὴν ἡμέραν ἐν ἧ τὸ πάθος ἐγένετο τῆς τροπῆς τοῦ 
~ > ~ 
πλήθους ἐπώνυμον εἶναι καὶ μέχρι τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς 
/ yy \ - » δ᾽ > \ 
χρόνων ὄχλου φυγὴν καλεῖσθαι. ἔοικε δ᾽ οὐ μικρὰν 
ἀφορμὴν παρέχειν τοῖς θεοποιοῦσι τὰ θνητὰ καὶ εἰς 
> Α > uA \ Ἁ ~ > ~ A 
οὐρανὸν ἀναβιβάζουσι τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν ἐπιφανῶν τὰ 
~ ~ / “- 
συμβάντα ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ περὶ τὴν σύγκρισιν τοῦ 
. , ” ~ 
ἀνδρὸς ἐκείνου Kat τὴν διάκρισιν. ἐν τε yap τῷ 
~ ~ ~ > > 
βιασμῷ τῆς μητρὸς αὐτοῦ εἴθ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων τινὸς 
wf)? « A ~ / \ nA > λ ~ 
εἴθ᾽ ὑπὸ θεοῦ γενομένῳ τὸν ἥλιον ἐκλιπεῖν φασιν 
~ σ > ~ 
ὅλον Kal σκότος παντελῶς ὥσπερ ἐν νυκτὶ τὴν γῆν 
κατασχεῖν ἔν τε τῇ τελευτῇ αὐτοῦ ταὐτὸ συμβῆναι 
΄ \ , \ « 
λέγουσι πάθος. ὁ μὲν δὴ κτίσας τὴν “Ῥώμην καὶ 
~ > θ ᾿ “75 Io) tw tA \ Ῥ, 5A 
πρῶτος ἀποδειχθεὶς ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς βασιλεὺς “Ῥωμύλος 
, ~ A > ‘ > 
τοιαύτης λέγεται τελευτῆς τυχεῖν, οὐδεμίαν ἐξ ad- 
- e Μ 
τοῦ γενεὰν καταλιπών, ἑπτὰ μὲν ἔτη καὶ τριάκοντα 
\ ” 
βασιλεύσας, πεντηκοστὸν δὲ καὶ πέμπτον ἔτος ἔχων 
14 ζάλη Kiessling (φ΄. Plut. Rom. 27), δὴ ζάλη Reiske: 
δηλα ἡ O, Jacoby. 
474 


BOOK II. 56, 4-7 


carried out the deed in the senate-house, they divided 
his body into several pieces, that it might not be 
seen, and then came out, each one hiding his part 
of the body under his robes, and afterwards burying 
it in secret. Others say that while haranguing the 
people he was slain by the new citizens of Rome, and 
that they undertook the murder at the time when the 
rain and the darkness occurred, the assembly of the 
people being then dispersed and their chief left with- 
out his guard. And for this reason, they say, the day 
on which this event happened got its name from 
the flight of the people and is called Populifugia} 
down to our times. Be that as it may, the incidents 
that occurred by the direction of Heaven in connexion 
with this man’s conception and death would seem to 
give no small authority to the view of those who make 
gods of mortal men and place the souls of illustrious 
persons in heaven. For they say that at the time 
when his mother was violated, whether by some man 
or by a god, there was a total eclipse of the sun 
and a general darkness as in the night covered the 
earth, and that at his death the same thing happened. 
Such, then, is reported to have been the death of 
Romulus, who built Rome and was chosen by her 
citizens as their first king. He left no issue, and after 
reigning thirty-seven years, died in the fifty-fifth 


2 Or Poplifugia. The same explanation of the origin 
of this festival is given by Plutarch (Rom. 29), who also 
records the more common version that the original “flight 
of the people”’ occurred shortly after the departure of the 
Gauls, at a time when several Latin tribes suddenly 
appeared before the city. Acecordisg to a third view, 
found in Macrobius (111. 2, 14), Etruscans were the invaders. 


475 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἀπὸ γενεᾶς. νέος yap δὴ παντάπασιν ἔτυχε τῆς 
ἡγεμονίας ὀκτωκαιδεκαέτης ὦν, ὡς ἅπαντες ὁμο- 
λογοῦσιν οἱ τὰς περὶ αὐτοῦ συγγράψαντες ἱστορίας. 
ΠΥΠ.. Τῷ δ᾽ ἑξῆς ἐνιαυτῷ βασιλεὺς μὲν οὐδεὶς 

3 ΄ « , > \ ΄ Δ “- 
ἀπεδείχθη “Ῥωμαίων, ἀρχὴ δέ τις, ἣν καλοῦσι 
μεσοβασίλειον, ἐπεμελεῖτο τῶν κοινῶν τοιόνδε τινὰ 
τρόπον ἀποδεικνυμένη τῶν πατρικίων οἵ κατα- 

ὔ 3 \ \ ¢€ ΕΠ / / 
γραφέντες εἰς τὴν βουλὴν ὑπὸ “PwyvrAov διακόσιοι 
τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες, ὥσπερ ἔφην, διενεμήθησαν εἰς 
δεκάδας. ἔπειτα διακληρωσάμενοι τοῖς λαχοῦσι 
δέκα πρώτοις ἀπέδωκαν ἄρχειν τῆς πόλεως τὴν 
αὐτοκράτορα ἀρχήν. ἐκεῖνοι δ᾽ οὐχ ἅμα πάντες 
> ΄ > Φ 3 ~ ε ΄, / a 
ἐβασίλευον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ διαδοχῆς ἡμέρας πέντε ἕκαστος, 
ἐν αἷς tas τε ῥάβδους εἶχε καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τῆς 
~ > ‘ 4 / $2 £ ~ 
βασιλικῆς ἐξουσίας σύμβολα. παρεδίδου δ᾽ 6 πρῶ- 
- \ > - ~ 
tos ἄρξας τῷ δευτέρῳ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν κἀκεῖνος τῷ 
τρίτῳ καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἐγίνετο μέχρι τοῦ τελευταίου. 
διεξελθούσης δὲ τοῖς πρώτοις δέκα 5 τῆς πεντηκον- 
\ 

θημέρου προθεσμίας ἕτεροι δέκα THY ἀρχὴν παρ- 
r , \ ee ͵ 50 AY) > \ 3 

ελάμβανον καὶ παρ᾽ ἐκείνων αὖθις ἄλλοι. ἐπεὶ ὃ 
ἔδοξε τῷ δήμῳ παῦσαι τὰς δεκαδαρχίας * ἀχθομένῳ 
yp ONL AXE Oe 
ταῖς μεταβολαῖς τῶν ἐξουσιῶν διὰ TO μήτε προ- 
αιρέσεις ἅπαντας ὁμοίας ἔχειν μήτε φύσεις, τότε 
δὴ συγκαλέσαντες εἰς ἐκκλησίαν τὸ πλῆθος οἱ βου- 
> ~ 
λευταὶ κατὰ φυλάς Te καὶ φράτρας ἀπέδωκαν αὐτῷ 
~ ~ ~ ” A 
περὶ τοῦ κόσμου τῆς πολιτείας σκοπεῖν, εἴτε βασιλεῖ 


1 jv added by Ambrosch. 

2 βασιλεῦσι after 5€xadeleted by Bicheler; Reiske emended 
to μεσοβασιλεῦσι. 

8 ἐπεὶ δ᾽ Reiske: ἔπειτα O. 

4 δεκαδαρχίας B: δεκαρχίας R. 


410 


BOOK II. 56, 7-57, 3 


year of his age; for he was very young when he 
obtained the cule, being no more than eighteen 
years old, as is agreed by all who have written 
his history. 

LVII. The! following year there was no king 
of the Romans elected, but a certain magistracy, 
called by them an interregnum, had the oversight of 
public affairs, being created in much the following 
manner: The patricians who had been enrolled 
in the senate under Romulus, being, as I have 
βαιά. two hundred in number, were divided into 
decuriae ;* then, when lots had been cast, the first 
ten persons upon whom the lot fell were invested 
by the rest with the absolute rule of the State. 
They did not, however, all reign together, but suc- 
cessively, each for five days, during which time they 
had both the rods and the other insignia of the royal 
power. The first, after his power had expired, 
handed over the government to the second, and he 
to the third, and so onto the last. After the first ten 
had reigned their appointed time of fifty days, ten 
others received the rule from them, and from those 
in turn others. But presently the people decided 
to abolish the rule of the decuriae, being irked 
by the changes of power, since the men did not all 
have either the same purposes or the same natural 
abilities. Thereupon the senators, calling the people 
together in assembly by tribes and curiae, permitted 
them to consider the form of government and deter- 
mine whether they wished to entrust the public 


1 For chaps. 57-58 cf. Livy t. 17; 18, 1 and 5. 
* Chap. 47 1. * Groups of ten. 


477 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


βούλεται τὰ κοινὰ ἐπιτρέπειν εἴτε ἀρχαῖς ἐνιαυσίοις. 
A ~ > «δ ~ 7 
4 od μὴν 6 ye δῆμος ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῷ τὴν αἵρεσιν ἐποίησεν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀπέδωκε τοῖς βουλευταῖς τὴν διάγνωσιν, ὡς 
ἀγαπήσων ὁποτέραν ἂν ἐκεῖνοι δοκιμάσωσι τῶν 
πολιτειῶν: τοῖς δὲ βασιλικὴν μὲν ἐδόκει κατα- 
στήσασθαι πολιτείαν ἅπασι, περὶ δὲ τοῦ μέλλοντος 
ἄρξειν στάσις ἐνέπιπτεν ἐξ ὁποτέρας ἔσται τάξεως. 
οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ τῶν ἀρχαίων βουλευτῶν ᾧοντο δεῖν 
ἀποδειχθῆναι τὸν ἐπιτροπεύσοντα τὴν πόλιν, ot δ᾽ 
~ > i 
ἐκ τῶν ὕστερον ἐπεισαχθέντων, οὗς νεωτέρους 
ἐκάλουν. 
5 ~ 
LVIII. “ΕἙλκομένης δ᾽ ἐπὶ πολὺ τῆς φιλονεικίας 
τελευτῶντες ἐπὶ τούτῳ συνέβησαν τῷ δικαίῳ, ὥστε 
δυεῖν θάτερον, ἢ τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους βουλευτὰς ἀπο- 
A ͵ ~ \ > ~ ‘ ~ > 
δεῖξαι βασιλέα σφῶν μὲν αὐτῶν μηδένα, τῶν ὃ 
s 
ἄλλων ὃν av ἐπιτηδειότατον εἶναι νομίσωσιν, ἢ 
τοὺς νεωτέρους τὸ αὐτὸ ποιῆσαι τοῦτο. δέχονται 
A a ς / ‘ ‘ >) Ἀ “- 
τὴν αἵρεσιν ot πρεσβύτεροι καὶ πολλὰ ἐπὶ σφῶν 
= »” > \ ~ 
αὐτῶν βουλευσάμενοι τάδε ἔγνωσαν: ἐπειδὴ τῆς 
/ > 4 
ἡγεμονίας αὐτοὶ κατὰ τὰς συνθήκας ἀπηλαύνοντο 
~ ~ \ 
μηδὲ! τῶν ἐπεισαχθέντων βουλευτῶν 3 μηδενὶ προσ- 
΄ \ > / > > > / ” θ » ὃ 
θεῖναι τὴν ἀρχήν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπακτόν τινα ἔξωθεν ἄνδρα 
e Ἅ / 
Kal μηδ᾽ ὁποτέροις προσθησόμενον, ws ἂν μάλιστα 
> / \ / > / > ὃ - 
ἐξαιρεθείη τὸ στασιάζον, ἐξευρόντες ἀποδεῖξαι 
2 βασιλέξέαᾳ. ταῦτα βουλευσάμενοι προὐχειρίσαντο 
~ εν 
ἄνδρα γένους μὲν τοῦ Σαβίνων, υἱὸν δὲ Π]ομπιλίου 
1 μηδὲ Biicheler, Sintenis: μήγε A, μήτε Β. , : 
Σ τῶν ἐπεισαχθέντων βουλευτῶν Cary, τῶν ἐπεισελθόντων 
βουλευτῶν Jacoby, τῶν νεωστὶ βουλευόντων Sintenis, τῶν 


βουλευτῶν Kiessling, τῶν ἑτέρων βουλευτῶν Garrer: τῶν 
ἐπιβουλευόντων Ο. 


478 


BOOK II. 57, 3-58, 2 


interests to a king or to annual magistrates. The 
people, however. did not take the choice upon them- 
selves, but referred the decision to the senators. in 
timating that they would be satisfied with whichever 
form of government the others should approve. The 
senators all favoured establishing a monarchica! form 
of government, but strife arose over the question 
from which group the future king should be chosen. 
For some thought that the one who was to govern 
the commonwealth ought to be chosen from among 
the original senators, and others that he should be 
chosen from among those who had been admitted 
afterwards and whom they called new senators. 
LVIII. The contest being drawn out to a great 
length, they at last reached an agreement on the 
basis that one of two courses should be followed— 
either the older senators should choose the king, 
who must not, however, be one of themselves, but 
might be anyone else whom they should regard as 
most suitable, or the new senators shouid do the same. 
The older senators accepted the right of choosing, 
and after a long consultation among themselves 
decided that, since by their agreement they them- 
selves were excluded from the sovereignty, they 
would not confer it on any of the newly-admitted 
senators, either, but would find some man from out- 
side who would espouse neither party, and declare 
him king, as the most effectual means of putting an 
end to party strife. After they had come to this re- 
solution, they chose a man of the Sabine race, the son 
of Pompilius Pompon, a person of distinction, whose 


479 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Πόμπωνος ἀνδρὸς ἐπιφανοῦς ὄνομα' Nouar,” ἡλικίας 
τε τῆς φρονιμωτάτης ὄντα, τετταρακονταετιας γὰρ 
οὐ πολὺ ἀπεῖχε, καὶ ἀξιώσει μορφῆς βασιλικόν. ἦν 
δὲ αὐτοῦ καὶ κλέος μέγιστον οὐ παρὰ Κυρίταις μό- 
νον, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ τοῖς περιοίκοις ἐπὶ σοφίᾳ. ὡς 
δὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς συγκαλοῦσι τὸ πλῆθος εἰς 
ἐκκλησίαν, καὶ παρελθὼν ἐξ αὐτῶν 6 τότε μεσο- 
βασιλεὺς εἶπεν, ὅτι κοινῇ δόξαν ἅπασι τοῖς βου- 
λευταῖς βασιλικὴν καταστήσασθαι πολιτείαν, κύριος 
γεγονὼς αὐτὸς τῆς ἢ διαγνώσεως τοῦ παραληψο- 
μένου τὴν ἀρχὴν βασιλέα τῆς πόλεως αἱρεῖται 
Νόμαν []ομπίλιον. καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο πρεσβευτὰς 
ἀποδείξας ἐκ τῶν πατρικίων ἀπέστειλε τοὺς παρα- 
ληψομένους τὸν ἄνδρα ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐνιαυτῷ τρίτῳ 
τῆς ἑκκαιδεκάτης ὀλυμπιάδος, ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον 
Πυθαγόρας ὃ Λάκων. 

LIX. Μέχρι μὲν δὴ τούτων οὐδὲν ἀντειπεῖν ἔχω 
πρὸς τοὺς ἐκδεδωκότας τὴν περὶ τὸν ἄνδρα τοῦτον 
ἱστορίαν, ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἑξῆς ἀπορῶ τί ποτε χρὴ λέγειν. 
πολλοὶ μὲν γάρ εἰσιν ot γράψαντες ὃ ὅτι [Πυθαγόρου 
μαθητὴς ὁ Νόμας ἐγένετο καὶ καθ᾽ ὃν χρόνον ὑπὸ 
τῆς Ῥωμαίων πόλεως ἀπεδείχθη βασιλεὺς φιλο- 
σοφῶν ἐν Κρότωνι διέτριβεν, 6 δὲ χρόνος τῆς 
Πυθαγόρου ἡλικίας μάχεται πρὸς τὸν λόγον. οὐ 

1 κατ᾽ before ὄνομα deleted by Kiessling. 

* After Νόμαν the MSS. have χρὴ δὲ τὴν δευτέραν συλλαβὴν 


ἐκτείνοντας βαρυτονεῖν, rejected by Portus. 
* τῆς added by Kiessling. 4 ἣν Jacoby: ἐν 7 O. 


480 


BOOK II. 58, 2-59, 2 


name was Numa. He was in that stage of life, being 
near forty,in which prudence is the most conspicuous, 
and of an aspect full of royal dignity ; and he en- 
joyed the greatest renown for wisdom, not only 
among the citizens of Cures, but among all the 
neighbouring peoples as well. After reaching this 
decision the senators assembled the people, and that 
one of their number who was then the interrex, 
coming forward, told them that the senators had 
unanimously resolved to establish a monarchical 
form of government and that he, having been em- 
powered to decide who should succeed to the rule, 
chose Numa Pempilius as king of the State. After 
this he appoinied ambassadors from among the 
patricians and sent them to conduct Numa to 
Rome that he might assume the royal power. 
This happened in the third year of the sixteenth 
Olympiad,' at which Pythagoras, a Lacedaemonian. 
won the foot-race. 

LIX. Up? to this point, then, I have nothing to 
allege in contradiction to those who have published 
the history of this man ; but in regard to what follows 
I am at a loss what to say. For many have written 
that Numa was a disciple of Pythagoras and that 
when he was chosen king by the Romans he was 
studying philosophy at Croton. But the date of 
Pythagoras contradicts this account, since he was 


1.718 B.o. 2Cf. Livy i. 18, 2-4. 





δ᾽ Steph.: πισαμόρας ABa, πεισαγόρας Bb. 
6 εἰσιν οἱ γράψαντες Jacoby: οἱ γράψαντες O; ἔγραψαν 
Biicheler. 


43] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ 5.7 ΝΜ > \ \ / aA A 
yap ὀλίγοις ἔτεσιν, ἀλλὰ Kal τέτταρσι γενεαῖς ὅλαις 
ὕστερος ἐγένετο Πυθαγόρας Νόμα, ὡς ἐκ τῶν 
κοινῶν παρειλήφαμεν ἱστοριῶν. ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τῆς 
ἑκκαιδεκάτης ὀλυμπιάδος μεσούσης τὴν “Ρωμαίων 

/ / / \ A A 

βασιλείαν παρέλαβε, Πυθαγόρας δὲ μετὰ THY πεντη- 

\ > / / > > , / 
κοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα διέτριψεν ἐν ᾿Ιταλίᾳ. τούτου 
δ᾽ ἔτι μεῖζον ἔχω τεκμήριον εἰπεῖν ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ 
συμφωνεῖν τοὺς χρόνους ταῖς παραδεδομέναις ὑπὲρ 
τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἱστορίαις, ὅτι καθ᾽ ὃν χρόνον ὃ Νόμας 
> A \ / > A e \ « / »Μ 
ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν ἐκαλεῖτο ὑπὸ “Ῥωμαίων οὔπω 
πόλις ἣν ἡ Κρότων τέτταρσι γὰρ ὅλοις ὕστερον 
᾿, vA / Μ «ς / "4 > \ 
ἔτεσιν ἢ Νόμαν ἄρξαι Ρωμαίων Μύσκελος αὐτὴν 
ἔκτισεν ἐνιαυτῷ τρίτῳ τῆς ἑπτακαιδεκάτης ὀλυμ- 
πιάδος. οὔτε δὲ [Πυθαγόρᾳ τῷ Lapiw συμῴφιλο- 

- ΄ / > / A 
σοφῆσαι τῷ μετὰ τέτταρας ἀκμάσαντι γενεὰς 
Ὁ \ > \ / yee εν , ΄, 
δυνατὸν ἦν τὸν Νιόθμαν οὔτ᾽ ἐν Κρότωνι διατρίβειν, 
gad > \ > / > \ A / Ξ a ~ 
ὅτ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐκάλουν ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν “Ῥωμαῖοι, τῇ 

ΔΑ ἔνθ᾽ A / 5» ae € A ς \ 
μήπω TOT οὔσῃ πόλει. ἀλλ᾽ ἐοίκασιν ot τὰ ὑπὲρ 

? ~ / > \ / 2907 > 2 
αὐτοῦ γράψαντες, εἰ χρὴ δόξαν ἰδίαν ἀποφήνασθαι, 
ν ἢ ~ / « ᾽ὔ / 
δύο ταῦτα λαβόντες ὁμολογούμενα, τήν τε {Πυθα- 
γόρου διατριβὴν τὴν γενομένην ἐν ᾿Ϊταλίᾳ καὶ τὴν 

pe... .§ 
Nopa σοφίαν (ὡμολόγηται yap ὑπὸ πάντων ὃ ἀνὴρ 
γενέσθαι σοφός) ἐπισυνάψαι ταῦτα καὶ ποιῆσαι 
/ \ A / » / \ / 

Πυθαγόρου μαθητὴν tov Νόμαν οὐκέτι τοὺς βίους 
~ Μ 

αὐτῶν ἐξετάσαντες, εἰ κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἤκμασαν 

/ ~ ? ᾿ς 

ἀμφότεροι χρόνους, ὅπερ ἐγὼ πεποίηκα νῦν" εἰ μή 

/ \ ~ 

τις ἄρα Πυθαγόραν ἕτερον ὑποθήσεται πρὸ τοῦ 
τι / / \ / Ὁ ᾿ 

Σαμίου γεγονέναι παιδευτὴν σοφίας, ᾧ συνδιέτριψεν 


1 ὡμολόγηται Bb: ὁμολογεῖται BaR. 
482 


BOOK II. 59, 2-4 


not merely a few years younger than Numa, but 
actually lived four whole generations later, as we 
learn from universal history ; for Numa succeeded 
to the sovereignty of the Romans in the middle of 
the sixteenth Olympiad, whereas Pythagoras resided 
in Italy after the fiftieth Olympiad.t But I can 
advance yet a stronger argument to prove that the 
chronology is incompatible with the reports handed 
down about Numa, and that is, that at the time 
when he was called to the sovereignty by the Romans 
the city of Croton did not yet exist; for it was not 
until four whole years after Numa had begun to 
rule the Romans that Myscelus founded this city, 
in the third year of the seventeenth Olympiad.? 
Accordingly, it was impossible for Numa either to 
have studied philosophy with Pythagoras the 
Samian, who flourished four generations after him, 
or to have resided in Croton, a city not as yet 
in existence when the Romans called him to the 
sovereignty. But if I may express my own opinion, 
those who have written his history seem to have 
taken these two admitted facts, namely, the re- 
sidence of Pythagoras in Italy and the wisdom of 
Numa (for he has been allowed by everybody to 
have been a wise man), and combining them, to have 
made Numa a disciple of Pythagoras, without going 
on to inquire into their lives, as I have now done, 
to discover whether they both flourished at the same 
period—uuless, indeed, one is going to assume that 
there was another Pythagoras who taught philosophy 
before the Samian, and that with him Numa 


1580/79 B.o. 2709 B.c. 
483 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ > ~ 
6 Nopas. τοῦτο δ᾽ οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως ἂν ἀποδεῖξαι 
4 \ ~ > / / e / 
δύναιτο μηδενὸς τῶν ἀξιολόγων μήτε “Ῥωμαίου 

7239 ἡ a > AUT ἰὃ / / 
μήθ᾽ Ἕλληνος, ὅσα Kaye! εἰδέναι, παραδεδωκότος 
> ε / > A \ \ / A 
ἐν ἱστορίᾳ. ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων ἅλις. 

LX. Ὁ δὲ Νόμας ἀφικομένων ὡς αὐτὸν τῶν 
καλούντων ἐπὶ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν, τέως μὲν ἀντέλεγε 
καὶ μέχρι πολλοῦ διέμεινεν ἀπομαχόμενος μὴ λαβεῖν 
τὴν ἀρχήν, ὡς δὲ οἵ τε ἀδελφοὶ προσέκειντο λιπα- 
ροῦντες καὶ τελευτῶν ὁ πατὴρ οὐκ ἠξίου τηλικαύτην 
τιμὴν διδομένην ἀπωθεῖσθαι, συνέγνω γενέσθαι βα- 
σιλεύς - τοῖς δὲ “Ῥωμαίοις πυθομένοις ταῦτα παρὰ 

~ ~ A + \ »“ > - A 
τῶν πρεσβευτῶν, πρὶν ὄψει Tov ἄνδρα ἰδεῖν πολὺς 
~ ¢ e 
αὐτοῦ παρέστη πόθος, ἱκανὸν ἡγουμένοις τεκμήριον 
~ > ~ 
εἶναι τῆς σοφίας, εἰ τῶν ἄλλων ὑπὲρ TO μέτριον 


2 


ἐκτετιμηκότων βασιλείαν καὶ τὸν εὐδαίμονα βίον ἐν 
ταύτῃ ὃ τιθεμένων μόνος ἐκεῖνος ὡς φαύλου τινὸς καὶ 
οὐκ ἀξίου σπουδῆς πράγματος καταφρονεῖ, παρα- 
γενομένῳ τε ὑπήντων ἔτι καθ᾽ ὁδὸν ὄντι σὺν ἐπαίνῳ 
πολλῷ καὶ ἀσπασμοῖς καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις τιμαῖς παρα- 
πέμποντες εἰς τὴν πόλιν. ἐκκλησίας δὲ μετὰ τοῦτο 
συναχθείσης, ἐν ἧ διήνεγκαν ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τὰς ψήφους 
ai φυλαὶ κατὰ φράτρας καὶ τῶν πατρικίων ἐπικυ- 
ρωσάντων τὰ δόξαντα τῷ πλήθει καὶ τελευταῖον 
ἔτι τῶν ὀρνιθοσκόπων αἴσια τὰ παρὰ τοῦ δαιμονίου 
σημεῖα ἀποφηνάντων παραλαμβάνει τὴν ἀρχήν. 
τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα “Pwpaiot φασι στρατείαν μηδε- 
μίαν ποιήσασθαι, θεοσεβῆ δὲ καὶ δίκαιον γενόμενον 
ἐν εἰρήνῃ πάντα τὸν τῆς ἀρχῆς χρόνον διατελέσαι 


1 ὅσα κἀμὲ Β : ὅσους pe R. 


484 


BOOK II. 59, 4-60, 4 


associated. But I do not know how this could be 
proved, since it is not supported, so far as I know, 
by the testimony of any author of note, either Greek 
or Roman. But I have said enough on this subject. 

LX. When the ambassadors came to Numa to 
invite him to the sovereignty, he for some time 
refused it and long persisted in his resolution not 
to accept the royal power. But when his brothers 
kept urging him insistently and at last his father 
argued that the offer of so great an honour ought 
not to be rejected, he consented to become king. 
As soon as the Romans were informed of this by 
the ambassadors, they conceived a great yearning 
for the man before they saw him, esteeming it a 
sufficient proof of his wisdom that, while the others 
had valued sovereignty beyond measure, looking 
upon it as the source of happiness, he alone despised 
it as a paltry thing and unworthy of serious attention. 
And when he approached the city, they met him 
upon the road and with great applause, salutations 
and other honours conducted him into the city. 
After that, an assembly of the people was held, in 
which the tribes by curiae gave their votes in his 
favour; and when the resolution of the people had 
been confirmed by the patricians, and, last of all, 
the augurs had reported that the heavenly signs 
were auspicious, he assumed the office. The 
Romans say that he undertook no military campaign, 
but that, being a pious and just man, he passed the 
whole period of his reign in peace and caused the 


2 αὐτὸν τῶν Kiessling: αὐτὸν τούτων τῶν O. 


ὃ ἐν ταύτῃ B: ἐνταῦθα R. 
485 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


καὶ τὴν πόλιν ἄριστα πολιτευομένην παρασχεῖν, 
λόγους τε ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ πολλοὺς καὶ θαυμαστοὺς 
λέγουσιν ἀναφέροντες τὴν ἀνθρωπίνην σοφίαν εἰς 
θεῶν ὑποθήκας. νύμφην γάρ τινα μυθολογοῦσιν 
᾿Ηγερίαν φοιτᾶν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἑκάστοτε διδάσκουσαν 
τὴν βασιλικὴν σοφίαν, ἕτεροι δὲ οὐ νύμφην, ἀλλὰ 
τῶν Movody μίαν. καὶ τοῦτό φασι γενέσθαι πᾶσι 
φανερόν. ἀπιστούντων γὰρ, ὡς ἔοικε, τῶν ἀνθρώ- 
πων κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς καὶ πεπλάσθαι νομιζόντων τὸν 
\ ~ ~ / / > \ > / 
περὶ τῆς θεᾶς λόγον, βουλόμενον αὐτὸν ἐπιδείξασθαι 
τοῖς ἀπιστοῦσιν ἐναργές τι μήνυμα τῆς πρὸς τὴν 
δαίμονα ὁμιλίας διδαχθέντα ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς ποιῆσαι 
/ / « / A \ > \ 
τάδε: καλέσαντα “Ῥωμαίων πολλοὺς καὶ ἀγαθοὺς 
εἰς τὴν οἰκιαν, ἐν ἦ διαιτώμενος ἐτύγχανεν, ἔπειτα 
/ ~ > ~ Ἁ ” ~ + 
δείξαντα τοῖς ἐλθοῦσι τὰ ἔνδον τῇ τε ἄλλῃ κατα- 
~ \ ~ 
σκευῇ φαύλως κεχορηγημένα καὶ δὴ καὶ τῶν εἰς 
ἑστίασιν ὀχλικὴν ἐπιτηδείων ἄπορα, τότε μὲν ἀπαλ- 
λάττεσθαι κελεύειν, εἰς ἑσπέραν δὲ καλεῖν αὐτοὺς 
ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον - παραγενομένοις δὲ κατὰ τὴν ἀπο- 
δειχθεῖσαν ὥραν ἐπιδεῖξαι στρωμνάς τε πολυτελεῖς 
καὶ τραπέζας ἐκπωμάτων γεμούσας πολλῶν καὶ 
καλῶν ἑστίασιν τε αὐτοῖς παραθεῖναι κατακλιθεῖσιν 
ε / > ~ Δ 0.9 Ἃ > ~ / / 
ἁπάσης ἐδωδῆς, ἣν οὐδ᾽ av ἐκ πολλοῦ πάνυ χρόνου 
παρασκευάσασθαί τινι τῶν τότε ἀνθρώπων ῥάδιον 
Ss A tA 
ἦν. τοῖς δὲ “Ρωμαίοις katamAnkiv τε πρὸς ἕκαστον 
~ ς / ς A“ \ / > > / ~ 
τῶν ὁρωμένων ὑπελθεῖν καὶ δόξαν ἐξ ἐκείνου τοῦ 
χρόνου παραστῆναι βέβαιον, ὅτι θεά τις αὐτῷ συνῆν. 
LXI. Οἱ δὲ τὰ μυθώδη πάντα περιαιροῦντες ἐκ 
~ « / / ι ε \ ~ / \ 
τῆς ἱστορίας πεπλάσθαι φασὶν ὑπὸ τοῦ Νόμα τὸν 
1 καὶ after ὁμιλίας deleted by Reiske. 
486 


BOOK II. 60, 4-61, 1 


State to be most excellently governed. They relate 
also many marvellous stories about him, attributing 
his human wisdom to the suggestions of the gods. 
For they fabulously affirm that a certain nymph, 
Egeria, used to visit him and instruct him on each 
occasion in the art of reigning, though others say that 
it was not a nymph, but one of the Muses. And 
this, they claim, became clear to every one; for, 
when people were incredulous at first, as may well be 
supposed, and regarded the story concerning the 
goddess as an invention, he, in order to give the un- 
believers a manifest proof of his converse with this 
divinity, did as follows, pursuant to her instructions. 
He invited to the house where he lived a great many 
of the Romans, all men of worth, and having shown 
them his apartments, very meanly provided with 
furniture and particularly lacking in everything that 
was necessary to entertain a numerous company, 
he ordered them to depart for the time being, but 
invited them to dinner in the evening. And when 
they came at the appointed hour, he showed them 
rich couches and tables laden with a multitude of 
beautiful cups, and when they were at table, he 
set before them a banquet consisting of all sorts of 
viands, such a banquet, indeed, as it would not have 
been easy for any man in those days to have prepared 
in a long time. The Romans were astonished at 
everything they saw, and from that time they enter- 
tained a firm belief that some goddess held con- 
verse with him. 

LXI. But those who banish everything that is 
fabulous from history say that the report concerning 


1 For §§ 4-7 cf. Livy i. 19, 1-5. 
487 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


περὶ τῆς ᾿Ηγερίας λόγον, ἵνα ῥᾷον αὐτῷ προσ- 
έχωσιν ot τὰ θεῖα δεδιότες καὶ προθύμως δέχωνται 
τοὺς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τιθεμένους νόμους, ὡς παρὰ θεῶν 
κομιζομένους. λαβεῖν δὲ αὐτὸν τὴν τούτων μίμησιν 
ἀποφαίνουσιν ἐκ τῶν ᾿Ελληνικῶν παραδειγμάτων 
ζηλωτὴν γενόμενον τῆς τε Mivw τοῦ Κρητὸς καὶ 
τῆς Λυκούργου τοῦ Λακεδαιμονίου σοφίας - ὧν ὁ 
μὲν ὁμιλητὴς ἔφη γενέσθαι τοῦ Διὸς καὶ φοιτῶν 
εἰς τὸ Δικταῖον ὄρος, ἐν ᾧ τραφῆναι τὸν Ala μυθο- 
λογοῦσιν ot Κρῆτες ὑπὸ τῶν Κουρήτων νεογνὸν 
ὄντα, κατέβαινεν εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν ἄντρον καὶ τοὺς 
νόμους ἐκεῖ συντιθεὶς ἐκόμιζεν, οὗς ἀπέφαινε παρὰ 
τοῦ Διὸς λαμβάνειν: ὁ δὲ Λυκοῦργος εἰς Δελφοὺς 
ἀφικνούμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ ᾿πόλλωνος ἔφη διδάσκεσθαι 
τὴν νομοθεσίαν. τὸ μὲν οὖν ἀκριβολογεῖσθαι περὶ 
τῶν μυθικῶν ἱστορημάτων καὶ μάλιστα τῶν εἰς 
θεοὺς ἀναφερομένων μακρῶν λόγων δεόμενον ὁρῶν 
ἐάσω, ἃ δέ μοι δοκοῦσιν ἀγαθὰ “Ῥωμαῖοι λαβεῖν 
ἐκ τῆς ἐκείνου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀρχῆς, ὡς ἐκ τῶν ἐπι- 
χωρίων ἔμαθον ἱστοριῶν ἀφηγήσομαι, προειπὼν ἐν 
οἵαις ἐτύγχανε ταραχαῖς τὰ πράγματα τῆς πόλεως 
ὄντα, πρὶν ἐκεῖνον ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν παρελθεῖν. 
LXIL. Μετὰ τὴν Ῥωμύλου τελευτὴν ἡ βουλὴ 
τῶν κοινῶν γενομένη κυρία καὶ χρόνον ἐνιαύσιον, 
ὥσπερ ἔφην, κατασχοῦσα τὴν δυναστείαν διαφέρε- 
σθαι καὶ στασιάζειν αὐτὴ πρὸς ἑαυτὴν ἤρξατο περὶ 
τοῦ πλείονός τε καὶ ἴσου. ὅσον μὲν γὰρ αὐτῆς 
μέρος ‘AABavdv ἦν ἀπὸ τῶν ἅμα “Ῥωμύλῳ τὴν 





1 Chap. 57. 
488 


BOOK II. 61, 1-62, 1 


Egeria was invented by Numa, to the end that, when 
once the people were possessed with a fear of the 
gods, they might more readily pay regard to him and 
willingly receive the laws he should enact, as coming 
from the gods. They say that in this he followed 
the example of the Greeks, emulating the wisdom 
both of Minos the Cretan and of Lycurgus the 
Lacedaemonian. For the former of these claimed 
to hold converse with Zeus, and going frequently to 
the Dictaean mountain, in which the Cretan legends 
say that the new-born Zeus was brought up by the 
Curetes, he used to descend into the holy cave; 
and having composed his laws there, he would pro- 
duce them, affirming that he had received them 
from Zeus. And Lycurgus, paying visits to Delphi, 
said he was forming his code of laws under the instruc- 
tion of Apollo. But, as I am sensible that to give 
a particular account of the legendary histories, and 
especially of those relating to gods, would require 
a long discussion, I shall omit doing so, and shall 
relate instead the benefits which the Romans seem 
to me to have received from this man’s rule, according 
to the information I have derived from their own 
histories. But first I will show in what confusion 
the affairs of the State were before he came to the 
throne. 

LXII. After the death of Romulus the senate, 
being now in full control of the government and 
having held the supreme power for one year, as 
I have related.) began to be at odds with itself 
and to split into factions over questions of pre- 
eminence and equality. For the Alban element, 
who together with Romulus had planted the colony, 


489 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἀποικίαν στειλάντων, γνώμης τε ἄρχειν ἠξίου καὶ 
τιμῶν τὰς μεγίστας λαμβάνειν καὶ θεραπεύεσθαι 
~ > 
πρὸς τῶν ἐπηλύδων" ot δ᾽ ὕστερον els τοὺς πα- 
τρικίους καταγραφέντες ἐκ τῶν ἐποίκων οὐδεμιᾶς 
” ~ ~ ~ 
ῴοντο δεῖν ἀπελαύνεσθαι τιμῆς οὐδὲ μειονεκτεῖν 
~ ἘΝ / > -“ ~ / 2 ff 
τῶν ἕτέρων, μάλιστα δ᾽ ὅσοι τοῦ Σαβίνων ἐτύγ- 
χανον ὄντες γένους καὶ κατὰ τὰς συνθήκας τὰς 
/ Ῥ, 5A \ Ta 2-74 - ” 1 
γενομένας “Ρωμύλῳ πρὸς Τάτιον ἐπὶ τοῖς ἴσοις 
μετειληφέναι τῆς πόλεως παρὰ τῶν ἀρχαίων οἰκη- 
τόρων καὶ τὴν αὐτὴν χάριν ἐκείνοις αὐτοὶ δεδω- 
7 90. ἡ 3 Ld δὲ ~ \ Ar ὃ ~ 
κέναι €odKovv ἅμα δὲ τῷ τὴν βουλὴν διαστῆναι 
\ A ~ ~ = ~ \ e / 
Kal TO TOV πελατῶν πλῆθος διχῇ μερισθὲν ἑκατέρᾳ 
/ ~ > ~ ~ 
συνέβαινε τῶν στάσεων. ἦν δέ τι τοῦ δημοτικοῦ 
μέρος οὐκ ὀλίγον ἐκ τῶν νεωστὶ προσεληλυθότων 
τῇ πολιτείᾳ ὃ διὰ τὸ μηδενὸς συνάρασθαι τῷ 
“6 
“Ῥωμύλῳ πολέμου παρημελημένον ὑπὸ τοῦ ἦγε- 
, “y ~ ir / “- A > λ ’ 4 
μόνος οὔτε γῆς εἰλήφει μοῖραν οὔτε ὠφελείας. 
~ > > 
τοῦτο ἀνέστιον Kal πτωχὸν ἀλώμενον ἐχθρὸν ἐκ 
~ - a / 
τοῦ ἀναγκαίου τοῖς κρείττοσιν ἦν καὶ νεωτερίζειν 
/ / 
ἑτοιμότατον. ἐν τοιούτῳ δὴ κλύδωνι τὰ πράγματα 
~ / / ε / / ~ 
τῆς πόλεως σαλεύοντα ὁ Νόμας καταλαβών, πρῶτον 
μὲν τοὺς ἀπόρους τῶν δημοτῶν ἀνέλαβε διανείμας 
αὐτοῖς ἀφ᾽ ἧς Ρωμύλος ἐκέκτητο χώρας καὶ ἀπὸ 
τῆς δημοσίας μοῖράν τινα ὀλίγην: ἔπειτα τοὺς 
ε 
πατρικίους οὐδὲν μὲν ἀφελόμενος ὧν οἱ κτίσαντες 
~ > > / αι Ἁ 
τὴν πόλιν εὕροντο, τοῖς δ᾽ ἐποίκοις ἑτέρας τινὰς 


1 γενόμενοι after ἴσοις deleted by Biicheler: emended 
εὐχόμενοι by Portus. 
2 καὶ Sylburg: ἢ AB. 


490 


BOOK II. 62, 1-4 


claimed the right, not only of delivering their opinions 
first and enjoying the greatest honours, but also of 
being courted by the newcomers. Those, on the 
other hand, who had been admitted afterwards into 
the number of the patricians from among the new 
settlers thought that they ought not to be excluded 
from any honours or to stand in an inferior position 
to the others. This was felt particularly by those 
who were of the Sabine race and who, in virtue of 
the treaty made by Romulus with Tatius, supposed 
they had been granted citizenship by the original 
inhabitants on equal terms, and that they had 
shown the same favour to the former in their turn. 
The senate being thus at odds, the clients also were 
divided into two parties and each joined their re- 
spective factions. There were, too, among the 
plebeians not a few, lately admitted into the num- 
ber of the citizens, who, having never assisted 
Romulus in any of his wars, had been neglected by 
him and had received neither a share of land nor 
any booty. These, having no home, but being poor 
and vagabonds, were by necessity enemies to their 
superiors and quite ripe for revolution. So Numa, 
having found the affairs of the State in such a raging 
sea of confusion, first relieved the poor among the 
plebeians by distributing to them some small part 
of the land which Romulus had possessed and of 
the public land ; and afterwards he allayed the strife 
of the patricians, not by depriving them of anything 
the founders of the city had gained, but by bestowing 





3 ἐδόκουν added by Kiessling. 


4 οὔτ᾽ ἄλλας ὠφελείας Reiske, οὔτε λείας Kiessling. 


49] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


5 ἀποδοὺς τιμάς, ἔπαυσε διαφερομένους. ἁρμοσά- 
μενος δὲ τὸ πλῆθος ἅπαν ὥσπερ ὄργανον πρὸς ἕνα 
τὸν τοῦ κοινῇ; συμφέροντος λογισμὸν καὶ τῆς 
πόλεως τὸν περίβολον αὐξήσας τῷ Kupwiw λόφῳ 
(τέως γὰρ ἔτι ἀτείχιστος ἦν) τότε τῶν ἄλλων 
πολιτευμάτων ἥπτετο δύο ταῦτα πραγματευόμενος, 
οἷς κοσμηθεῖσαν ὑπελάμβανεν 5 τὴν πόλιν εὐδαίμονα 
γενήσεσθαι καὶ μεγάλην: εὐσέβειαν μὲν πρῶτον, 
διδάσκων τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ὅτι παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ θεοὶ 
δοτῆρές εἰσι τῇ θνητῇ φύσει καὶ φύλακες, ἔπειτα 
δικαιοσύνην, δι᾿ ἣν καὶ τὰ παρὰ τῶν θεῶν ἀπ- 
έφαινεν ἀγαθὰ καλὰς τὰς ἀπολαύσεις φέροντα τοῖς 
κτησαμένοις. 

LXIII. ᾽Εξ ὧν δὲ διεπράξατο νόμων τε καὶ πο- 
λιτευμάτων ἑκάτερον τούτων εἰς μεγάλην ἐπίδοσιν 
προελθεῖν ἅπαντα μὲν οὐκ ἀξιῶ γράφειν, τὸ μῆκος 
ὑφορώμενος τοῦ λόγου καὶ ἅμα οὐδ᾽ ἀναγκαίαν 
ec aA \ > Lea, ? ~ € a ε / 
ὁρῶν τὴν ἀναγραφὴν αὐτῶν ᾿λληνικαῖς ἱστορίαις, 
αὐτὰ δὲ τὰ κυριώτατα καὶ φανερὰν δυνάμενα 
ποιῆσαι πᾶσαν τὴν προαίρεσιν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἐπὶ 
κεφαλαίων ἐρῶ, τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀπὸ τῆς περὶ τὰ θεῖα 

2 διακοσμήσεως ποιησάμενος. ὅσα μὲν οὖν ὑπὸ 
“Ῥωμύλου ταχθέντα ἐν ἐθισμοῖς τε καὶ νόμοις 
παρέλαβεν, ἀπὸ τοῦ κρατίστου τετάχθαι πάντα 
ἡγησάμενος εἴα κατὰ χώραν μένειν, ὅσα δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ 
ἐκείνου παραλελεῖφθαι ἐδόκει, ταῦτα προσετίθει 
πολλὰ μὲν ἀποδεικνὺς τεμένη τοῖς μήπω τιμῶν 

1 κοινῇ Kiessling: κοινοῦ O. 


2 ἂν after ὑπελάμβανεν deleted by Biicheler, Meineke. 
3 Kiessling: γραφὴν O. 


492 


BOOK II. 62, 5-63, 2 


some other honours on the new settlers. And having 
attuned the whole body of the people, like a musical 
instrument, to the sole consideration of the public 
good and enlarged the circuit of the city by the addi- 
tion of the Quirinal hill (for till that time it was still 
without a wall), he then addressed himself to the 
other measures of government, labouring to inculcate 
these two things by the possession of which he con- 
ceived the State would become prosperous and great : 
first, piety, by informing his subjects that the gods 
are the givers and guardians of every blessing to 
mortal men, and, second, justéce, through which, he 
showed them, the blessings also which the gods 
bestow bring honest enjoyment to their possessors. 

LXIII. As regards the laws and institutions by 
which he made great progress in both these direc- 
tions, I do not think it fitting that I should enter 
into all the details, not only because I fear the 
length of such a discussion but also because I do 
not regard the recording of them as necessary to 
a history intended for Greeks; but I shall give 
a summary account of the principal measures, 
which are sufficient to reveal the man’s whole 
purpose, beginning with his regulations concerning 
the worship of the gods. I should state, however, 
that all those rites which he found established 
by Romulus, either in custom or in law, he left un- 
touched, looking upon them all as established in 
the best possible manner. But whatever he thought 
had been overlooked by his predecessor, he added, 
consecrating many precincts to those gods who had 


493 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ a \ \ \ \ Α 
τυγχάνουσι θεοῖς, πολλοὺς δὲ βωμοὺς καὶ ναοὺς 
c ~ 
ἱδρυόμενος €optds τε ἑκάστῳ αὐτῶν ἀπονέμων 
καὶ τοὺς ἐπιμελησομένους αὐτῶν ἱερεῖς καθιστὰς 
¢ 
ἁγνείας τε Kal θρησκείας καὶ καθαρμοὺς Kal τὰς 
Μ ~ 
ἄλλας θεραπείας Kat τιμὰς πάνυ πολλὰς νομοθετῶν, 
σ΄ «ς 
ὅσας οὔθ᾽ “Ελληνὶς οὔτε βάρβαρος ἔχει πόλις οὐδ᾽ 

¢ ~ 
at μέγιστον ἐπ᾽ εὐσεβείᾳ φρονοῦσαί ποτε: αὐτόν 
τε τὸν “Ῥωμύλον ὡς κρείττονα γενόμενον ἢ κατὰ 
\ ~ ~ 
τὴν θνητὴν φύσιν ἱεροῦ κατασκευῇ Kat θυσίαις 
διετησίοις ἔταξε Κυρῖνον ἐπονομαζόμενον γεραί- 
ρεσθαι. ἔτι γὰρ ἀγνοούντων τὸν ἀφανισμὸν αὐτοῦ 
ε / a” A / / ee: a Ὁ > 
Ρωμαίων εἴτε κατὰ δαίμονος πρόνοιαν εἴτ᾽ ἐξ ἐπι- 
~ > \ 
βουλῆς ἀνθρωπίνης ἐγένετο, παρελθών τις εἰς τὴν 
~ + ,.αὐὐονὦν 
ἀγορὰν ᾿Ϊούλιος ὄνομα τῶν ἀπ᾽ Ackaviov yewpyt- 
A > \ \ \ / > r ¥ δὲ Ἃ 
KOs ἀνὴρ καὶ τὸν βίον ἀνεπίληπτος, οἷος μηδὲν av 
> a / 
ψεύσασθαι κέρδους ἕνεκεν ' οἰκείου, ἔφη παραγιγνό- 
3 5» im °P. 5A 8 ~ > / > nw 
μενος ἐξ ἀγροῦ “Pwpwdrov ἰδεῖν ἀπιόντα ἐκ τῆς 
͵ ” coe ‘fG9 4. 015 \ > Ἂν 
πόλεως ἔχοντα τὰ ὅπλα, Kal ἐπειδὴ ἐγγὺς ἐγένετο 
> ~ ~ Ἂν ~ λέ = πάν. A Ῥ, 
ἀκοῦσαι ταῦτα αὐτοῦ λέγοντος γγελλε ἱῬω- 
/ 3 / \ ΞΡΕΥ “ 7 ε A \ ¢ > 
patois, ᾿]ούλιε, τὰ παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ὅτι με ὁ λαχὼν ὅτ 
> \ ΝΜ \ ‘ 
ἐγενόμην δαίμων εἰς θεοὺς ἄγεται τὸν θνητὸν 
~ a. - 32 
ἐκπληρώσαντα αἰῶνα: eit δὲ Kupivos.” περι- 
Α 4 “ \ \ \ θ - θ / 
λαβὼν δὲ ἅπασαν τὴν περὶ τὰ θεῖα νομοθεσίαν 
A - > > \ / σ ~ « ~ 
γραφαῖς διεῖλεν εἰς ὀκτὼ μοίρας, ὅσαι τῶν ἱερῶν 
> ¢ / 
ἦσαν αἱ συμμορίαι. 
\ ¢ ~ , 
LXIV. ArédwKe δὲ μίαν μὲν ἱερουργιῶν διά- 


- / Δ ΝΜ x ‘ 
ταξιν τοῖς τριάκοντα Koupiwow, οὗς ἔφην τὰ κοινὰ 


1 ἕνεκεν Jacoby in note: ἕνεκα O, Jacoby in text. 


494 


BOOK II. 63, 2-64, 1 


hitherto received no honours, erecting many altars 
and temples, instituting festivals in honour of each, 
and appointing priests to have charge of their sanctu- 
aries and rites, and enacting laws concerning purifica- 
tions, ceremonies, expiations and many other obser- 
vances and honours in greater number than are to 
be found in any other city, either Greek or barbarian, 
even in those that have prided themselves the most 
at one time or another upon their piety. He also 
ordered that Romulus himself, as one who had 
shown a greatness beyond mortal nature, should be 
honoured, under the name of Quirinus, by the erec- 
tion of a temple and by sacrifices throughout the year. 
For! while the Romans were yet in doubt whether 
divine providence or human treachery had been the 
eause of his disappearance, a certain man, named 
Julius, descended from Ascanius, who was a husband- 
man and of such a blameless life that he would 
never have told an untruth for his private advantage, 
arrived in the Forum and said that, as he was coming 
in from the country, he saw Romulus departing 
from the city fully armed and that, as he drew near 
to him, he heard him say these words: ‘“ Julius, 
announce to the Romans from me, that the genius 
to whom I was allotted at my birth is conducting 
me to the gods, now that I have finished my mortal 
life, and that I am Quirinus.” Numa, having re- 
duced his whole system of religious laws to writing, 
divided them into eight parts, that being the number 
of the different classes of religious ceremonies. 
LXIV. The first division of religious rites be 
assigned to the thirty curiones, who, as I have stated,” 


1 Cf. Livy i. 16, 5-8. 2 Chap. 23, 1-2. 
495 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ ~ ~ 
2 θύειν ὑπὲρ τῶν φρατριῶν ἱερά. τὴν δὲ δευτέραν 


τοῖς καλουμένοις ὑπὸ μὲν ᾿Ελλήνων στεφανηφόροις,2 
ὑπὸ δὲ “Ρωμαίων φλάμισιν,3 obs ἐπὶ τῆς φορήσεως 
τῶν πίλων * τε καὶ στεμμάτων, ἃ καὶ νῦν ἔτι φοροῦσι 
Τφλάμα 5 καλοῦντες, οὕτω προσαγορεύουσι. τὴν 
δὲ τρίτην τοῖς ἡγεμόσι τῶν κελερίων, οὗς ἔφην 
ἱππεῖς τε καὶ πεζοὺς στρατευομένους φύλακας ἀπο- 
δείκνυσθαι τῶν βασιλέων, καὶ γὰρ οὗτοι τεταγμένας 
τινὰς ἱερουργίας ἐπετέλουν. τὴν δὲ τετάρτην τοῖς 
ἐξηγουμένοις τὰ θεόπεμπτα σημεῖα καὶ διαιροῦσι 
τίνων ἐστὶ μηνύματα πραγμάτων ἰδίᾳ τε καὶ δη- 
μοσίᾳ, οὗς ἀφ᾽ ἑνὸς εἴδους τῶν θεωρημάτων τῆς 
τέχνης “Ῥωμαῖοι καλοῦσιν αὔγορας, ἡμεῖς δ᾽ ἂν 
εἴποιμεν οἰωνοπόλους, ἁπάσης τῆς μαντικῆς παρ᾽ 
αὐτοῖς ὄντας ἐπιστήμονας τῆς τε περὶ τὰ οὐράνια 
καὶ τὰ μετάρσια καὶ τὰ ἐπίγεια. τὴν δὲ πέμπτὴν 
ταῖς φυλαττούσαις τὸ ἱερὸν πῦρ παρθένοις, αἵ 
καλοῦνται πρὸς αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τῆς θεᾶς ἣν θεραπεύ- 


1 φρατριῶν Bb: φρατριέων A. *Steph.: στεφηφόροις O. 
3 Steph.: φλάμοσιν AB, Jacoby. 
ἀπιλῶν. .. B: πιλωτῶν R. 


5 The word is corrupt; φιλάμινα was proposed by Turne- 
bus, φλάμεα by Scaliger. But the word really wanted here 
is dia; this could easily have been changed to φλάμα by a 
scribe who saw no connexion between φῖλα and φλάμονες. 





1 Stephanéphoros was a title given in various Greek states 
to magistrates entitled to wear a crown as a symbol of 
their office: here the word is used as the best Greek 
equivalent for ‘‘ wearers of the fillet.” 


496 


BOOK ITI. 64, 2-5 


perform the public sacrifices for the curiae. The 
second, to those called by the Greeks stephanéphoroi 1 
or “wearers of the crown” and by the Romans 
flamines ;* they are given this name from their 
wearing of caps and fillets, called + flama,? which 
they continue to wear even to this day. The third, 
to the commanders of the celeres, who, as I have 
stated,’ were appointed to be the body-guards of 
the kings and fought both as cavalry and infantry ; 
for these also performed certain specified religious 
rites. The fourth, to those who interpret the signs 
sent by the gods and determine what they portend 
both to private persons and to the public; these, 
from one branch of the speculations belonging to 
their art, the Romans call augurs, and we should call 
them oiénopoloi or “* soothsayers by means of birds” ; 
they are skilled in all sorts of divination in use among 
the Romans, whether founded on signs appearing 
in the heavens, in mid-air or on the earth. The 
fifth he assigned to the virgins who are the guardians 
of the sacred fire and who are called Vestals by the 


3 Cf. Livy i. 20, 2. 

3 An error for fila? Dionysius is here giving the usual 
Roman etymology of flamen, which is preserved to us by 
Varro (de Ling. Lat. v. 84) and by Festus (p. 87). Both 
authorities state that these priests got their name from the 
filum, the fillet ef wool which they wore round about the 
top of their caps. It is hard to believe that our author 
could have confused filum with fammeum, the bridal veil ; 
see the critical note. The true etymology of flamen is dis- 
puted ; but there is much to be said in favour of deriving 
it from flare (“‘ to blow’’), since one of the first duties of a 
priest would be to blow up the fire for the sacrifices. 

4 Chap. 13. 


497 
VOL. I. 5 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ε / ~ 
ουσιν €oTiddes, αὐτὸς πρῶτος ἱερὸν ἱδρυσάμενος 
Ῥ, / °E / \ θέ 5 ὃ / Le SB 
ὡμαίοις “Eotias καὶ παρθένους ἀποδείξας αὐτῇ 
/ = 
θυηπόλους - ὑπὲρ ὧν ὀλίγα Kat αὐτὰ τἀναγκαιό- 
τατα τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἀπαιτούσης ἀναγκαῖον εἰπεῖν. 
μὴ \ “a \ 7 » / a} \ aA 
ἔστι yap ἃ καὶ ζητήσεως ἠξίωται" παρὰ πολλοῖς 
~ ¢ -— «A ~ 
τῶν Ῥωμαϊκῶν συγγραφέων κατὰ τὸν τόπον τοῦ- 
- - \ ey, > . ͵, - a 
Tov, ὧν" οἱ τὰς αἰτίας οὐκ ἐξητακότες ἐπιμελῶς 
εἰκαιοτέρας ἐξήνεγκαν τὰς γραφάς. 
\ ~ ae ~ 4 
LXV. Τὴν γοῦν ἵδρυσιν τοῦ ἱεροῦ “Ῥωμύλῳ τινὲς 
ἀνατιθέασι, τῶν ἀμηχάνων νομίζοντες εἶναι πόλεως 
> > ~ \ 
οἰκιζομένης ὑπ᾽ ἀνδρὸς ἐμπείρου μαντικῆς μὴ 
~ ~ A ~ 
κατασκευασθῆναι πρῶτον ἑστίαν κοινὴν τῆς πό- 
~ > ~ 
Aews, καὶ ταῦτα ἐν Ἄλβᾳ τοῦ κτίστου τραφέντος, 
> - \ > - ‘ ~ ~ / ¢ κ᾿ 
ἐν ἧ παλαιὸν ἐξ οὗ τὸ τῆς θεᾶς ταύτης ἱερὸν 
« / > ‘ ~ A ~ / 
ἱδρυμένον ἦν, Kal τῆς μητρὸς αὐτοῦ θυηπόλου 
~ ~ ~ ε 
γενομένης τῇ θεῷ: διαιρούμενοί τε διχῆ τὰ ἱερὰ 
~ ~ ‘4 
καὶ τὰ μὲν αὐτῶν Kowa ποιοῦντες καὶ πολιτικά, 
A , ἫΝ \ / > + ~ / 
τὰ δὲ ἴδια καὶ συγγενικά, δι᾽ ἄμφω ταῦτά φασι 
\ > / φ “ Ῥ A / / 
πολλὴν ἀνάγκην εἶναι τῷ ᾿Ρωμύλῳ ταύτην σέβειν 
τὴν θεόν. οὔτε γὰρ ἀναγκαιότερον ἀνθρώποις 
~ ~ ~ ew 4 
οὐδὲν εἶναι τῆς κοινῆς ἑστίας οὔτε τῷ “Ῥωμύλῳ 
κατὰ διαδοχὴν γένους οὐδὲν οἰκειότερον, προγόνων 
~ > ~ ~ « 
μὲν ὑπάρχοντι τῶν ἐξ ᾿ΪΙλίου τὰ τῆς θεᾶς ἱερὰ 
ε a 2 > ε 
μετενεγκαμένων, μητρὸς δὲ ἱερείας. ἐοίκασι δ᾽ οἱ 
\ ~ \ 7 > el a ¢ / “ 
διὰ ταῦτα τὴν ἵδρυσιν τοῦ ἱεροῦ ᾿Ρωμύλῳ μᾶλλον 
1 καὶ after ἠξίωται deleted by Ambrosch. 
2 ὑπὲρ before ὧν deleted by Ambrosch. 





1 Cf. Livy i. 20, 3. 

2The word ἑστία means, aS a common noun, “ hearth,” 
and, as a proper noun, Hestia, the hearth-goddess, corre- 
sponding to the Roman Vesta. 


498 


BOOK II. 64, 5-65, 2 


Romans, after the goddess whom they serve, he 
himself having been the first to build a temple at 
Rome to Vesta and to appoint virgins to be her 
priestesses.! But concerning them it is necessary 
to make a few statements that are most essential, 
since the subject requires it ; for there are problems 
that have been thought worthy of investigation by 
many Roman historians in connexion with this 
topic and those authors who have not diligently 
examined into the causes of these matters have 
published rather worthless accounts. 

LXY. At any rate, as regards the building of the 
temple of Vesta, some ascribe it to Romulus, looking 
upon it as an inconceivable thing that, when a city 
was being founded by a man skilled in divination, a 
public hearth? should not have been erected first of 
all, particularly since the founder had been brought 
up at Alba, where the temple of this goddess had 
been established from ancient times, and since his 
mother had been her priestess. And recognizing 
two classes of religious ceremonies—the one public 
and common to all the citizens, and the other private 
and confined to particular families—they declare that 
on both these grounds Romulus was under every 
obligation to worship this goddess. For they say 
that nothing is more necessary for men than a public 
hearth, and that nothing more nearly concerned 
Romulus, in view of his descent, since his ancestors 
had brought the sacred rites of this goddess from 
Ilium and his mother had been her priestess. Those, 
then, who for these reasons ascribe the building 
of the temple to Romulus rather than to Numa 


499 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἰνατιθέ ἢ Νόμᾳ τὸ μὲν κοινὸν ὀρθῶς λέ 
ἀνατιθέντες ἢ Νόμᾳ τὸ μὲ ov ὀρθῶς λέγειν, 
“ / > / ε / ~ ” > ~ 
ὅτι πόλεως οἰκιζομένης ἑστίαν πρῶτον ἔδει ἰδρυθῆ- 
~ > ~ 
ναι καὶ ταῦτα ὑπ᾽ ἀνδρὸς οὐκ ἀπείρου τῆς περὶ τὰ 
θεῖα σοφίας, τὰ δὲ κατὰ μέρος ὑπέρ τε τῆς κατα- 
~ ~ ~ 4 € ~ \ ~ ~ 
σκευῆς τοῦ νῦν ὄντος ἱεροῦ Kat τῶν θεραπευουσῶν 
τὴν θεὸν παρθένων ἠγνοηκέναι. οὔτε γὰρ τὸ χωρίον 
~ > - a.5e \ / ~ « 4 > 
τοῦτο ἐν @ τὸ ἱερὸν φυλάττεται πῦρ “Ῥωμύλος ἦν 
ς / ~ ~ / \ 4 , 
6 καθιερώσας TH θεῷ (μέγα δὲ τούτου τεκμήριον 
~ / / «ς / a > A 
ὅτι τῆς τετραγώνου καλουμένης “Pans ἣν ἐκεῖνος 
ε / \ ~ ¢ ~ 
ἐτείχισεν ἐκτός ἐστιν, ἑστίας δὲ κοινῆς ἱερὸν ἐν τῷ 
/ ~ 
κρατίστῳ μάλιστα καθιδρύονται τῆς πόλεως ἅπαν- 
»Μ \ ~ / ᾽ὃ / + \ / 
tes, ἔξω δὲ τοῦ τείχους οὐδείς) οὔτε διὰ παρθένων 
/ ~ ~ 
tas θεραπείας κατεστήσατο TH θεῷ, μεμνημένος 
- es ae | a A \ \ , ͵ - 
ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ TOU) rept THY Ῥήτερᾶ πάθους, ἡἧ 
> 
συνέβη θεραπευούσῃ τὴν θεὸν τὴν παρθενίαν ἀπο- 
z ε 3. ἐν 27 A 
βαλεῖν, ὡς οὐχ ἱκανὸς ἐσόμενος, ἐάν τινα τῶν 
7 / \ 
θυηπόλων εὕρῃ διεφθαρμένην, κατὰ τοὺς πατρίους 
\ \ ΘΕ - 
τιμωρήσασθαι νόμους διὰ τὴν ἐπὶ ταῖς οἰκείαις 
“A A ~ 
συμφοραῖς ἀνάμνησιν. διὰ ταῦτα μὲν δὴ κοινὸν 
~ «ς / 
ἱερὸν οὐ κατεσκευάσατο τῆς ᾿Εστίας οὐδὲ ἱερείας 
~ > ¢ / ~ 
ἔταξεν αὐτῇ παρθένους, ἐν ἑκάστῃ δὲ τῶν τριάκοντα 
~ « / ε / Ts Se ΝΜ ¢ 
φρατριῶν ἱδρυσάμενος ἑστίαν, ἐφ᾽ ἧς ἔθυον ot φρα- 
- ζω > / A ~ - 
τριεῖς, θυνηπόλους αὐτῶν ἐποίησε τοὺς τῶν κουριῶν 
¢ / A > “Ἐλλ 50 / o 
ἡγεμόνας, τὰ παρ now ἔθη μιμησάμενος, ἅπερ 
αἱ ~ / ” / 
ἐν! ταῖς ἀρχαιοτάταις τῶν πόλεων ἔτι γίγνεται. 
,ὕ A > a_¢ 
τά γέ τοι καλούμενα πρυτανεῖα Tap αὐτοῖς “Eorias? 
1 ἅπερ ἐν Sintenis: ἃ παρὰ O, Jacoby. 
2 “Εστίας added by Reiske. 
500 


BOOK IT. 65, 2-4 


seem to be right, in so far as the general principle 
is concerned that, when a city was being founded, 
it was necessary for a hearth to be established first 
of all, particularly by a man who was not unskilled 
in matters of religion; but of the details relating 
to the building of the present temple and to the 
virgins who are in the service of the goddess they 
seem to have been ignorant. For, in the first place, 
it was not Romulus who consecrated to the goddess 
this place where the sacred fire is preserved (a strong 
proof of this is that it is outside of what they call 
Roma Quadrata,! which he surrounded with a wall, 
whereas all men place the shrine of the public hearth 
in the best part of a city and nobody outside of the 
walls) ; and, in the second place, he did not appoint 
the service of the goddess to be performed by virgins, 
being mindful, I believe, of the experience that had 
befallen his mother, who while she was serving the 
goddess lost her virginity; for he doubtless felt 
that the remembrance of his domestic misfortunes 
would make it impossible for bim to punish according 
to the traditional laws any of the priestesses he 
should find to have been violated. For this reason, 
therefore, he did not build a common temple of Vesta 
nor did he appoint virgins to be her priestesses ; 
but having erected a hearth in each of the thirty 
curiae on which the members sacrificed, he appointed 
the chiefs of the curiae to be the priests of those 
hearths, therein imitating the customs of the 
Greeks that are still observed in the most ancient 
cities. At any rate, what are called prytanea among 


1 A later name for the old Palatine city, which, according 
to the theory of the augurs, was quadrangular. 


901 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> ε 7 ~ 
ἐστὶν ἱερά, Kal θεραπεύεται πρὸς τῶν ἐχόντων TO 
μέγιστον ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι κράτος. 
/ 
LXVI. Nopas δὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν παραλαβὼν τὰς μὲν 
207 - ~ 
ἰδίας οὐκ ἐκίνησε τῶν φρατριῶν ἑστίας, κοινὴν δὲ 
κατεστήσατο πάντων μίαν ἐν τῷ μεταξὺ τοῦ τε 
Καπιτωλίου καὶ τοῦ Παλατίου χωρίῳ, συμπεπολι- 
f ” ~ ’ o's / \ / 
σμένων ἤδη τῶν λόφων Evi περιβόλῳ καὶ μέσης 
ἀμφοῖν οὔσης τῆς ἀγορᾶς, ἐν 7 κατεσκεύασται τὸ 
« a ~ 
ἱερόν, τήν τε φυλακὴν τῶν ἱερῶν κατὰ τὸν πάτριον 
τῶν Λατίνων νόμον διὰ παρθένων ἐνομοθέτησε 
/ 4 / > / \ A 
γίνεσθαι: ἔχει δέ τινας ἀπορίας καὶ τὸ φυλατ- 
~ ~ A 
τόμενον ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τί δήποτέ ἐστι καὶ διὰ τί 
πρόσκειται παρθένοις. τινὲς μὲν οὖν οὐδὲν ἔξω 
~ ~ / 
τοῦ φανεροῦ πυρὸς εἶναί φασι TO τηρούμενον, τὴν 
\ \ >] ~ / > ~ ~ Ἅ 
δὲ φυλακὴν αὐτοῦ παρθένοις ἀνακεῖσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ 
~ > / a ~ 
ἀνδράσι ποιοῦνται κατὰ TO εἰκός, OTL πῦρ μὲν 
> / / > + 4 ~ δ᾽ ¢ 4 
ἀμίαντον, παρθένος δ᾽ ἄφθαρτον, τῷ δ᾽ ἀγνοτάτῳ 
τῶν θείων τὸ! καθαρώτατον τῶν θνητῶν φίλον. 
€ / 2 55 ~ \ ~ / <4 ~ 
Eoria δ᾽ ἀνακεῖσθαι τὸ πῦρ νομίζουσιν, ὅτι γῆ τε 
> / ~ ΄ 
οὖσα ἡ θεὸς καὶ τὸν μέσον κατέχουσα τοῦ κόσμου 
~ / “ \ 
τόπον Tas ἀνάψεις τοῦ μεταρσίου ποιεῖται πυρὸς 
> F2€ ~ Ψ...8 / @ ΝΜ ~ ‘ 
ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῆς. εἰσὶ δέ τινες ot φασιν ἔξω τοῦ πυρὸς 
~ a ¢e A - / > ~ 
ἀπόρρητα tots πολλοῖς ἱερὰ κεῖσθαί τινα ἐν τῷ 


176 O: τὸν Jacoby (typographical error 1). 





1 Apparently each capital city among the Greeks had a 
prytaneum, containing the common hearth of the State, 
where the sacred fire was kept burning. This building 
would serve naturally as the headquarters of the chief 
magistrates (though in Athens the archons removed at an 


902 


BOOK II. 65, 4-66, 3 


them are temples of Hestia, and are served by the 
chief magistrates of the cities. 

LXVI. Numa, upon taking over the rule, did not 
disturb the individual hearths of the curiae, but 
erected one common to them all in the space be- 
tween the Capitoline and the Palatine (for these 
hills had already been united by a single wall into 
one city, and the Forum, in which the temple is 
built, lies between them), and he enacted, in accord- 
ance with the ancestral custom of the Latins, that 
the guarding of the holy things should be committed 
to virgins. There is some doubt, however, what it is 
that is kept in this temple and for what reason the 
care of it has been assigned to virgins, some affirming 
that nothing is preserved there but the fire, which 
is visible to everybody. And they very reasonably 
argue that the custody of the fire was committed to 
virgins, rather than to men, because fire is incorrupt 
and a virgin is undefiled, and the most chaste of 
mortal things must be agreeable to the purest of those 
that are divine. And they regard the fire as con- 
secrated to Vesta because that goddess, being the 
earth? and occupying the central place in the 
universe, kindies the celestial fires from herself. 
But there are some who say that besides the fire 
there are some holy things in the temple of the 
goddess that may not be revealed to the public, 


early date to the Thesmotheteum and the prytaneis took 
their meals in the Tholos); and here were entertained 
foreign ambassadors and also citizens who had deserved 
well of the State. 

* Vesta is similarly identified with the earth by Ovid, 
Fasti vi. 267. See Sir James Frazer’s instructive note on 
that passage (vol. iv. pp. 201 f.). 


503 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


- ~ - ε ~ 
τεμένει τῆς θεᾶς, ὧν οἵ τε ἱεροφάνται τὴν γνῶσιν 
ε 
ἔχουσι καὶ al παρθένοι, τεκμήριον οὐ μικρὸν παρ- 
εχόμενοι τοῦ λόγου τὸ συμβὰν περὶ τὴν ἔμπρησιν 
τοῦ ἱεροῦ κατὰ τὸν Φοινικικὸν πόλεμον τὸν πρῶ- 
« - \ 
τον συστάντα ἱΡωμαῖοις πρὸς Καρχηδονίους περὶ 
/ > ~ 
4 Σικελίας. ἐμπρησθέντος yap τοῦ τεμένους καὶ 
«- ~ > ~ ~ 
τῶν παρθένων φευγουσῶν ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς τῶν ἱερο- 
~ / 
φαντῶν tis Λεύκιος Καικίλιος ὁ καλούμενος Μέ- 
a. ὦ ες / ¢ \ > / > / 
τελλος ἀνὴρ ὑπατικός, ὁ τὸν ἀοίδιμον ἐκ Σικελίας 
ἀπὸ Καρχηδονίων καταγαγὼν ὀκτὼ καὶ τριάκοντα 
\ ξ \ > / / ς A ~ 07 
καὶ ἑκατὸν ἐλεφάντων θρίαμβον, ὑπεριδὼν τῆς ἰδίας 
ἀσφαλείας τοῦ κοινῇ συμφέροντος ἕνεκα παρεκιν- 
δύνευσεν εἰς τὰ καιόμενα βιάσασθαι καὶ τὰ κατα- 
~ Ψ ς / « 
λειφθέντα ὑπὸ τῶν παρθένων ἁρπάσας ἱερὰ διέσω- 
~ 27? -“ A A ~ 
σεν ἐκ τοῦ πυρός’ ἐφ᾽ ᾧ τιμὰς Tapa τῆς πόλεως 
/ ε ~ > / ~ ~ 
ἐξηνέγκατο μεγάλας, ws ἡ τῆς εἰκόνος αὐτοῦ τῆς ἐν 
δ Καπιτωλίῳ κειμένης ἐπιγραφὴ μαρτυρεῖ. τοῦτο 
δὴ λαβόντες ὁμολογούμενον ἐπισυνάπτουσιν αὐτοὶ 
στοχασμούς τινας ἰδίους, οἱ μὲν ἐκ τῶν ἐν Lapo- 
~ ~ / 
θράκῃ λέγοντες ἱερῶν μοῖραν εἶναί τινα φυλαττο- 
Ay ᾿ \ > / / \ > \ i κα ~ 
μένην τὴν ἐνθάδε, Δαρδάνου μὲν εἰς THY ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ 
~ ~ / \ ¢ \ 
κτισθεῖσαν πόλιν ἐκ τῆς νήσου τὰ ἱερὰ μετενεγ- 
/ > / \ . 3 ” > ~ / 
καμένου, Αἰνείου δὲ, ὅτ᾽ ἔφυγεν ἐκ τῆς Τρωάδος 
. - a \ ~ / > > / 
ἅμα τοῖς ἄλλοις καὶ ταῦτα κομίσαντος εἰς ᾿Ϊταλίαν, 
/ 
ot δὲ τὸ διοπετὲς ΠΠ]}αλλάδιον ἀποφαίνοντες εἶναι τὸ 
΄ > / / 
παρ᾽ ᾿ἰλιεῦσι γενόμενον, ws Αἰνείου κομίσαντος 
/ > an \ \ / > ~ 
αὐτὸ δι᾽ ἐμπειρίαν, Ἀχαιῶν δὲ τὸ μίμημα αὐτοῦ 
onl \ - ‘ / ww 
λαβόντων κλοπῇ - περὶ οὗ πολλοὶ σφόδρα εἴρηνται 
A ~ / > ‘ \ \ 
6 ποιηταῖς τε καὶ συγγραφεῦσι λόγοι. ἐγὼ δὲ TO 
1 κειμένης Biicheler, ἀνακειμένης Reiske: γενομένης O. 
904 


BOOK II. 66, 3-6 


of which only the pontiffs and the virgins have 
knowledge. As a strong confirmation of this story 
they cite » what happened at the burning of the temple 
during the First Punic War between the Romans and 
the Carthaginians over Sicily. For when the temple 
caught fire and the virgins fled from the flames, one 
of the pontiffs, Lucius Caecilius, called Metellus, a man 
of consular rank, the same who exhibited a hundred 
and thirty-eight elephants in the memorable triumph 
which he celebrated for his defeat of the Carthaginians 
in Sicily,t neglecting his own safety for the sake of 
the public good, ventured to force his way into the 
burning structure, and, snatching up the holy things 
which the virgins had abandoned, saved them from 
the fire; for which he received great honours from 
the State, as the inscription upon his statue on the 
Capitol testifies. Taking this incident, then, as an 
admitted fact, they add some conjectures of their 
own. Thus, some affirm that the objects preserved 
here are a part of those holy things which were once 
in Samothrace ; that Dardanus removed them out of 
that island into the city which he himself had built, 
and that Aeneas, when he fled from the Troad, 
brought them along with the other holy things into 
Italy. But others declare that it is the Palladium 
that fell from Heaven, the same that was in the 
possession of the people of Ilium ; for they hold that 
Aeneas, being wel! acquainted with it, brought it into 
Italy, whereas the Achaeans stole away the copy,— 
an incident about which many stories have been re- 
lated both by poets and by historians. For my part, 


* At Panormus, in 250, The temple of Vesta was burned 


in 241, 
905 


to 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μὲν εἶναί τινα Tots πολλοῖς ἄδηλα ἱερὰ φυλαττόμενα 
ὑπὸ τῶν παρθένων καὶ οὐ τὸ πῦρ μόνον ἐκ πολλῶν 
/ 4 / \ a > ” > 
πάνυ καταλαμβάνομαι, τίνα δὲ ταῦτ᾽ ἔστιν οὐκ 
> ~ ~ ” 3 > ‘ ” Μ 
ἀξιῶ πολυπραγμονεῖν οὔτ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν οὔτε ἄλλον 
>? / ~ 4 \ \ \ Ὁ - 
οὐδένα τῶν βουλομένων τὰ πρὸς θεοὺς ὅσια τηρεῖν. 
LXVII. Ai δὲ θεραπεύουσαι τὴν θεὸν παρθένοι 
τέτταρες μὲν ἦσαν κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς τῶν βασιλέων αὐτὰς 
αἱρουμένων ep οἷς κατεστήσατο δικαίοις ὁ Νόμας, 
4 \ \ ~ ~ « ~ a > ~ 
ὕστερον δὲ διὰ πλῆθος τῶν ἱερουργιῶν ἃς ἐπιτελοῦ- 
σιν ἕξ γενόμεναι μέχρι τοῦ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς διαμένουσι 
/ / Μ A ~ ~ ” > 
χρόνου, δίαιταν ἔχουσαι παρὰ τῇ θεῷ, ἔνθα δι 
ἡμέρας μὲν οὐδεὶς ἀπείργεται τῶν βουλομένων 
> / / \ +] \ ~ > / > / 
εἰσιέναι, νύκτωρ δὲ οὐδενὶ τῶν ἀρρένων ἐναυλίσα- 
σθαι θέμις. χρόνον δὲ τριακονταετῆ μένειν αὐτὰς 
ἀναγκαῖον ἁγνὰς γάμων θυηπολούσας τε καὶ τἄλλα 
θρησκευούσας κατὰ νόμον, ἐν ᾧ δέκα μὲν ἔτη μαν- 
/ > A »ἢ" / >) 2 ~ A ¢ ’ A A 
θάνειν αὐτὰς ἔδει, δέκα δ᾽ ἐπιτελεῖν τὰ ἱερά, τὰ δὲ 
A / 7. e / > / \ 
λοιπὰ δέκα διδάσκειν ἑτέρας. ἐκπληρωθείσης δὲ 
τῆς τριακονταετίας οὐδὲν ἦν τὸ κωλῦσον τὰς βουλο- 
μένας ἀποθείσας τὰ στέμματα καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ παρά- 
σημα τῆς ἱερωσύνης γαμεῖσθαι. καὶ ἐποίησάν τινες 
~ / ΣᾺ 7 τ » , « A 
τοῦτο πάνυ ὀλίγαι, ais ἄζηλοι συνέβησαν at τελευταὶ 
~ - 3 ~ 
τῶν βίων καὶ οὐ πάνυ εὐτυχεῖς, ὥστε δι᾽ οἰωνοῦ 
« A 
λαμβάνουσαι τὰς ἐκείνων συμφορὰς at λοιπαὶ παρ- 
~ ~ / / 
θένοι μένουσι παρὰ τῇ θεῷ μέχρι θανάτου, τότε δὲ 
᾿] ‘ ~ > 4, 5 \ ς / / ¢ \ 
εἰς τὸν τῆς ἐκλιπούσης ἀριθμὸν ἑτέρα πάλιν ὑπὸ 
~ ζω Α - 
τῶν ἱεροφαντῶν ἀποδείκνυται. τιμαὶ δὲ αὐταῖς 


506 


BOOK II. 66, 6-67, 3 


I find from very many evidences that there are 
indeed some holy things, unknown to the public, 
kept by the virgins, and not the fire alone; but 
what they are I do not think should be inquired 
into too curiously, either by me or by anyone else 
who wishes to observe the reverence due to the 
ods. 

LXVII. The virgins who serve the goddess were 
originally four and were chosen by the kings accord- 
ing to the principles established by Numa, but after- 
wards, from the multiplicity of the sacred rites they 
perform, their number was increased to six, and 
has so remained down to ourtime. They live in the 
temple of the goddess, into which none who wish are 
hindered from entering in the daytime, whereas it 
is not lawful for any man to remain there at night. 
They were required to remain undefiled by marriage 
for the space of thirty years, devoting themselves 
to offering sacrifices and performing the other rites 
ordained by law. During the first ten years their 
duty was to learn their functions, in the second 
ten to perform them, and during the remaining ten 
to teach others. After the expiration of the term of 
thirty years nothing hindered those who so desired 
from marrying, upon laying aside their fillets and 
the other insignia of their priesthood. And some, 
though very few, have done this; but they came 
to ends that were not at all happy or enviable. In 
consequence, the rest, looking upon their misfor- 
tunes as ominous, remain virgins in the temple of 
the goddess till their death, and then once more 
another is chosen by the pontiffs to supply the 
vacancy. Many high honours have been granted 


507 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


> ~ 
ἀποδέδονται παρὰ τῆς πόλεως πολλαὶ Kat Kadai, 
a ~ 
du’ ds οὔτε παίδων αὐταῖς ἐστι πόθος οὔτε γάμων, 
τιμωρίαι τε ἐπὶ τοῖς ἁμαρτανομένοις κεῖνται με- 
/ e > / \ \ \ / 
ydAa, ὧν ἐξετασταί Te καὶ κολασταὶ κατὰ νόμον 
>A td / \ \ Μ ~ > / 
εἰσὶν οἱ ἱεροφάνται, τὰς μὲν ἄλλο τι τῶν ἐλαττόνων 
¢ / es ~ \ \ 
ἁμαρτανούσας ῥάβδοις μαστιγοῦντες, τὰς δὲ φθα- 
/ 
ρείσας αἰσχίστῳ τε Kal ἐλεεινοτάτῳ παραδιδόντες 
~ / / 
4 θανάτῳ. ζῶσαι yap ἔτι πομπεύουσιν ἐπὶ κλίνης 
\ - ~ > 
φερόμεναι τὴν ἀποδεδειγμένην τοῖς νεκροῖς ἐκῴφοράν, 
/ / 
ἀνακλαιομένων αὐτὰς καὶ προπεμπόντων φίλων τε 
καὶ συγγενῶν, sani δὲ μέχρι τῆς Κολλίνης 
πύλης, ἐντὸς τείχους ἢ εἰς σηκὸν ὑπὸ γῆς κατ- 
εσκευασμένον ἅμα τοῖς ἐνταφίοις κόσμοις τίθενται 
> > ~ > 
καὶ OUT ἐπιστήματος οὔτ᾽ ἐναγισμῶν οὔτ᾽ ἄλλου 
~ / > 
5 τῶν νομίμων οὐδενὸς τυγχάνουσι. πολλὰ μὲν οὖν 
- / > ~ ¢ 
καὶ ἄλλα δοκεῖ μηνύματα εἶναι τῆς οὐχ ὁσίως 
΄ ς a“ / \ ς ~ 
ὑπηρετούσης τοῖς ἱεροῖς, μάλιστα δὲ ἡ σβέσις τοῦ 
΄ὔ Δ £,= Ὁ -“ \ 5 \ °P. - ὃ ὃ / 
πυρός, ἣν ὑπὲρ ἅπαντα τὰ δεινὰ ᾿“᾿ωμαῖοι δεδοί- 
~ ~ / ~ ες 
κασιν ἀφανισμοῦ τῆς πόλεως σημεῖον ὑπολαμ- 
- 3 vn ψι / / 
βάνοντες, ἀφ᾽ ἧς ποτ᾽ ἂν αἰτίας γένηται, Kal 
a S-*0 4 > / / 
πολλαῖς αὐτὸ θεραπείαις ἐξιλασκόμενοι κατάγουσι 
ἤδμ \ \ > - 
πάλιν εἰς τὸ ἱερόν: ὑπὲρ ὧν κατὰ τὸν οἰκεῖον 
\ > ~ 
καιρὸν ἐρῶ. 
‘ A > Ψ' 
LXVIII. Πάνυ δ᾽ ἄξιον καὶ τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν 
΄- - ~ > / ~ 2Q7/ 
ἱστορῆσαι τῆς θεᾶς, ἣν ἐπεδείξατο ταῖς ἀδίκως 
/ \ ς %,4 
ἐγκληθείσαις παρθένοις - πεπίστευται yap ὑπὸ © Pw- 
A / 
μαίων, εἰ καὶ παράδοξά ἐστι, Kal πολὺν πεποίηνται 
~ ¢ - σ A > 
2 λόγον ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν οἱ συγγραφεῖς. ὅσοι μὲν οὖν 


1 τείχους B: τοῦ τείχους R. 


508 


BOOK II. 67, 3-68, 2 


them by the commonwealth, as a result of which 
they feel no desire either for marriage or for children ; 
and severe penalties have been established for their 
misdeeds. It is the pontiffs who by law both inquire 
into and punish these offences; those Vestals who 
are guilty of lesser misdemeanours they scourge 
with rods, but those who have suffered defilement 
they deliver up to the most shameful and the most 
miserable death. For while they are yet alive they 
are carried upon a bier with all the formality of a 
funeral, their friends and relations attending them 
with lamentations, and after being brought as far 
as the Colline Gate, they are placed in an under- 
ground cell prepared within the walls, clad in their 
funeral attire; but they are not given a monument 
or funeral rites or any other customary solemnities. 
There are many indications, it seems, when a 
priestess is not performing her holy functions with 
purity, but the principal one is the extinction of the 
fire, which the Romans dread above all misfortunes, 
looking upon it, from whatever cause it proceeds, 
as an omen that portends the destruction of the 
city; and they bring fire again into the temple 
with many supplicatory rites, concerning which I 
shall speak on the proper occasion. 

LXVIII. However, it is also well worth relating 
in what manner the goddess has manifested herself 
in favour of those virgins who have been falsely 
accused. For these things, however incredible 
they may be, have been believed by the Romans 
and their historians have related much about them. 


1 This promise is not fulfilled in the extant portions of 
the history. 


509 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


~ \ 
tas ἀθέους ἀσκοῦσι φιλοσοφίας, εἰ δὴ καὶ φιλοσο- 
φίας αὐτὰς δεῖ καλεῖν, ἁπάσας διασύροντες τὰς 
> / ~ ~ A >. @ a“ 
ἐπιφανείας τῶν θεῶν tas παρ᾽ “EdAnow ἢ Bap- 
βάροις γενομένας καὶ ταὔτας εἰς γέλωτα πολὺν 
ΝΜ A ¢ / > ᾽ὔ > / Ψ A 
ἄξουσι τὰς ἱστορίας ἀλαζονείαις ἀνθρωπίναις αὐτὰς 
3 / e b) \ ~ / > 7 >’ ’ 
ἀνατιθέντες, ὡς οὐδενὶ θεῶν μέλον ἀνθρώπων οὐδενός. 
ὅσοι δ᾽ οὐκ ἀπολύουσι τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης ἐπιμελείας 
τοὺς θεούς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς εὐμενεῖς εἶναι 
νομίζουσι καὶ τοῖς κακοῖς δυσμενεῖς διὰ πολλῆς 
9 ’ ¢ / > \ / ς / A 
ἐληλυθότες ἱστορίας, οὐδὲ ταύτας ὑπολήψονται τὰς 
ἐπιφανείας εἶναι ἀπίστους. λέγεται δή ποτε τοῦ 
πυρὸς ἐκλιπόντος δι᾿ ὀλιγωρίαν τινὰ τῆς τότε αὐτὸ 
φυλαττούσης Αἰμιλίας, ἑτέρᾳ παρθένῳ τῶν νεωστὶ 
κατειλεγμένων καὶ ἄρτι μανθανουσῶν παραδούσης 
τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν, ταραχὴ πολλὴ γενέσθαι κατὰ τὴν 
πόλιν ὅλην καὶ ζήτησις ὑπὸ τῶν ἱεροφαντῶν, μή τι 
μίασμα περὶ τὸ πῦρ τῆς ἱερείας ἐτύγχανε γεγονός - 
ἔνθα δή φασι τὴν Αἰμιλίαν ἀναίτιον μὲν οὖσαν, 
ἀπορουμένην δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῷ συμβεβηκότι παρόντων τῶν 
ἱερέων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων παρθένων τὰς χεῖρας ἐπὶ τὸν 
βωμὸν ἐκτείνασαν εἰπεῖν - “᾿ στία, τῆς “Ῥωμαίων 
/ / 5» \ ¢ f \ / > 
πόλεως φύλαξ, εἰ μὲν ὁσίως καὶ δικαίως ἐπι- 
“λ pe A ς A / λί Φ ὃ / 

τετέλεκά! σοι τὰ ἱερὰ χρόνον ὀλίγου 3 δέοντα 

~ ‘ 
τριακονταετοῦς καὶ ψυχὴν ἔχουσα καθαρὰν καὶ 
σῶμα ἁγνόν, ἐπιφάνηθί μοι καὶ “βοήθησον * καὶ μὴ 
περιίδῃς τὴν σεαυτῆς ἱέρειαν τὸν οἴκτιστον μόρον 
ἀποθανοῦσαν " εἰ δὲ ἀνόσιόν τι πέπρακταί μοι, ταῖς 


1 Kiessling: τετέλεκα O. 2 Kiessling: ὀλίψῳ O. 
3 βοήθησον Reiske: βοήθησόν τε Aa, βοήθησόν ye Ab, 
βοήθησον... B. 


510 


BOOK II. 68, 2-4 


To be sure, the professors of the atheistic philo- 
sophies,—if, indeed, their theories deserve the 
name of philosophy,—who ridicule all the mani- 
festations of the gods which have taken place among 
either the Greeks or barbarians, will also laugh 
these reports to scorn and attribute them to human 
imposture, on the ground that none of the gods con- 
cern themselves in anything relating to mankind. 
Those, however, who do not absolve the gods from 
the care of human affairs, but, after looking deeply 
into history, hold that they are favourable to the 
good and hostile to the wicked, will not regard even 
these manifestations as incredible. It is said, then, 
that once, when the fire had beenextinguished through 
some negligence on the part of Aemilia, who had the 
care of it at the time and had entrusted it to another 
virgin, one of those who had been newly chosen 
and were then learning their duties, the whole city 
was in great commotion and an inquiry was made 
by the pontiffs whether there might not have been 
some defilement of the priestess to account for the 
extinction of the fire. Thereupon, they say, Ae- 
milia, who was innocent, but distracted at what had 
happened, stretched out her hands toward the altar 
and in the presence of the priests and the rest of the 
virgins cried: “Ὁ Vesta, guardian of the Romans’ 
city, if, during the space of nearly thirty years, 
I have performed the sacred offices to thee in a 
holy and proper manner, keeping a pure mind and a 
chaste body, do thou manifest thyself in my defence 
and assist me and do not suffer thy priestess to die 
the most miserable of all deaths ; but if I have been 
guilty of any impious deed, let my punishment 


oll 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἐμαῖς τιμωρίαις TO τῆς πόλεως ἄγος addyvoov.” } 
ταῦτ᾽ εἰποῦσαν καὶ περιρρήξασαν ἀπὸ τῆς καρπασί- 
vns ἐσθῆτος, ἣν ἔτυχεν ἐνδεδυκυῖα, βαλεῖν τὸν 
τελαμῶνα ἐπὶ τὸν βωμὸν μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν λέγουσι 
καὶ ἐκ τῆς κατεψυγμένης πρὸ πολλοῦ καὶ οὐδένα 
φυλαττούσης σπινθῆρα τέφρας ἀναλάμψαι φλόγα 
πολλὴν διὰ τῆς καρπάσου, ὥστε μηδὲν ἔτι δεῆσαι 
τῇ πόλει μήτε ἁγνισμῶν μήτε νέου πυρός. 

LXIX. Ἔτι δὲ τούτου θαυμασιώτερόν ἐστι καὶ 
μύθῳ μᾶλλον ἐοικὸς ὃ μέλλω λέγειν. κατηγορῆσαί 
τινά φασιν ἀδίκως μιᾶς τῶν παρθένων τῶν ἱερῶν 
Τυκκίας 5 ὄνομα, ἀφανισμὸν μὲν πυρὸς οὐκ ἔχοντα 
προφέρειν, ἄλλας δέ τινας ἐξ εἰκότων τεκμηρίων 
καὶ μαρτυριῶν ἀποδείξεις φέροντα οὐκ ἀληθεῖς. 
κελευσθεῖσαν δ᾽ ἀπολογεῖσθαι τὴν παρθένον τοσοῦτο 3 
μόνον εἰπεῖν, ὅτι τοῖς ἔργοις ἀπολύσεται τὰς δια- 
βολάς ταῦτα δ᾽ εἰποῦσαν καὶ τὴν θεὸν ἐπικαλεσα- 
μένην ἡγεμόνα τῆς ὁδοῦ γενέσθαι προάγειν ἐπὶ τὸν 
Τέβεριν ἐπιτρεψάντων μὲν αὐτῇ τῶν ἱεροφαντῶν, 
τοῦ δὲ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ὄχλου συμπροπέμποντος " 
γενομένην δὲ τοῦ ποταμοῦ πλησίον τὸ παροιμιαζό- 
μενον ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις τῶν ἀδυνάτων τόλμημα ὗπο- 
μεῖναι, ἀρυσαμένην ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ κοσκίνῳ " καὶ 
μέχρι τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἐνέγκασαν παρὰ τοὺς πόδας 
τῶν ἱεροφαντῶν ἐξερᾶσαι τὸ ὕδωρ. καὶ μετὰ 
ταῦτά φασι τὸν κατήγορον αὐτῆς πολλῆς ζητήσεως 
γενομένης μήτε ζῶντα εὑρεθῆναι μήτε νεκρόν. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τῶν ἐπιφανειῶν τῆς θεᾶς ἔχων. ἔτι 

1 ἀφάγνισον B: ἀφάγνισαι A; ἀφάνισαι Stepr. 
2 Kiessling: τυγκίας O. 
512 


BOOK II. 68, 5-69, 3 


expiate the guilt of the city.” Having said this, she 
tore off the band of the linen garment she had on 
and threw it upon the altar, they say, following 
her prayer; and from the ashes, which had been 
long cold and retained no spark, a great flame flared 
up through the linen, so that the city no longer re- 
quired either expiations or a new fire. 

LXIX. But what I am going to relate is still 
more wonderful and more like a myth. They say 
that somebody unjustly accused one of the holy 
virgins, whose name was Tuccia, and although he 
was unable to point to the extinction of the fire 
as evidence, he advanced false arguments based 
on plausible proofs and depositions; and that the 
virgin, being ordered to make her defence, said only 
this, that she would clear herself from the accusation 
by her deeds. Having said this and called upon 
the goddess to be her guide, she led the way to the 
Tiber, with the consent of the pontiffs and escorted 
by the whole population of the city; and when 
she came to the river, she was so hardy as to under- 
take the task which, according to the proverb, is 
among the most impossible of achievement: she 
drew up water from the river in a sieve, and carrying 
it as far as the Forum, poured it out at the feet of 
the pontiffs. After which, they say, her accuser, 
though great search was made for him, could never 
be found either alive or dead. But, though I 
have yet many other things to say concerning the 


8 τοσοῦτο Jacoby in note: τοῦτο O, Jacoby in text. 
ὁ καινῷ before κοσκίνῳ deleted by Jacoby ; emended to 
κενῷ by Steph. 


513 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ / \ ~ ~ 
πολλὰ λέγειν καὶ ἄλλα, ταῦτα ἱκανὰ εἰρῆσθαι 
/ 
νομίζω. 
TX °H = A a \ \ A ἷ 
XX. “Ἕκτη δὲ μοῖρα τῆς περὶ τὰ θεῖα νομο- 
Ss A ~ / 
θεσίας ἦν ἡ προσνεμηθεῖσα τοῖς καλουμένοις ὑπὸ 
«ς , «Δ 
Ρωμαίων Σαλίοις, ots αὐτὸς ὁ Νόμας ἀπέδειξεν ἐκ 
τῶν πατρικίων δώδεκα τοὺς εὐπρεπεστάτους ἐπι- 
/ @ ~ 
λεξάμενος νέους, ὧν ἐν Π͵Ἕαλατίῳ κεῖται τὰ ἱερὰ 
\ ‘ ~ “-“ 
καὶ αὐτοὶ καλοῦνται Iladativor. οἱ μὲν γὰρ 
> A ~ 
Ayawvareis, ὑπὸ δέ τινων KoddXjivor καλούμενοι 
- δΜί' ¢ / ’ > pe ~ 
Ζάλιοι, ὧν τὸ ἱεροφυλάκιόν ἐστιν ἐπὶ τοῦ Kupwiov? 
/ 
λόφου, peta Nopav ἀπεδείχθησαν ὑπὸ βασιλέως 
« ~ 
Οστιλίου κατ᾽ εὐχήν, ἣν ἐν τῷ πρὸς Σαβίνους εὔξατο 
πολέμῳ. οὗτοι πάντες οἱ Ζάλιοι χορευταί τινές 
> \ - > ~ 
εἰσι καὶ ὑμνηταὶ τῶν ἐνόπλων ® θεῶν. ἑορτὴ δ᾽ 
αὐτῶν ἐστι περὶ τὰ Παναθήναια τῷ * καλουμένῳ 
Μαρτίῳ μηνὶ δημοτελὴς ἐπὶ πολλὰς ἡμέρας ἀγο- 
μένη, ἐν αἷς διὰ τῆς πόλεως ἄγουσι τοὺς χοροὺς 
εἴς τε τὴν ἀγορὰν καὶ τὸ Καπιτώλιον καὶ πολλοὺς 
ἄλλους ἰδίους τε καὶ δημοσίους τόπους, χιτῶνας 
/ ~ f / \ 
ποικίλους χαλκαῖς μίτραις κατεζωσμένοι καὶ τη- 
βέννας ἐμπεπορπημένοι περιπορφύρους φοινικοπαρύ- 
~ ’ὔ 
φους, ἃς καλοῦσι τραβέας (ἔστι δ᾽ ἐπιχώριος αὕτη 
eT / > \ > a /, / \ Ἁ 
᾿ωμαίοις ἐσθὴς ἐν τοῖς πάνυ τιμία) καὶ τὰς καλου- 
1 ἄλλα Biicheler: om. O, Jacoby. 
2 Kupwiov Cary: κολλίνου O, Jacoby. 


3 ἐνόπλων Bb: ἐνοπλίων BaR. 
474 O: ἐν τῷ Ambrosch, Jacoby. 





1Cf. Livy i. 20, 4. 2 Usually called Agonenses. 
3«*«Colline hill,” the absurd reading of the MSS. and 
editors, cannot be from the hand of Dionysius. 


514 


BOOK II. 69, 3-70, 2 


manifestations of this goddess, I regard what has 
already been said as sufficient. 

LXX. The sixth division of his religious institu- 
tions was devoted to those the Romans call Salii. 
whom Numa himself appointed out of the patricians, 
choosing twelve young men of the most graceful ap- 
pearance.! These are the Salii whose holy things are 
deposited on the Palatine hill and who are themselves 
called the (Salit) Palatini; for the (Salii) Ago- 
nales,” by some called the Salii Collin, the repository 
of whose holy things is on the Quirinal hill,* were 
appointed after Numa’s time by King Hostilius, in 
pursuance of a vow he had made in the war against 
the Sabines. All these Salit are a kind of dancers 
and singers of hymns in praise of the gods of war. 
Their festival falls about the time of the Panathenaea,! 
in the month which they call March, and is cele- 
brated at the public expense for many days, dur- 
ing which they proceed through the city with their 
dances to the Forum and to the Capitol and to many 
other places both private and public. They wear 
embroidered tunics girt about with wide girdles of 
bronze, and over these are fastened, with brooches, 
robes striped with scarlet and bordered with purple, 
which they call trabeae ; this garment is peculiar to 
the Romans and a mark of the greatest honour. 


4**Panathenaea’’ does not here mean the well-known 
Athenian festival (which took place in August), but the 
Quinquatria, the Roman festival in honour of Minerva 
(March 19-23). The principal celebration of the Salii 
began on the first of March and continued until at least 
the 24th; Polybius (xxi. 10, 12) gives the total period 
as thirty days. 


9510 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


μένας ἄπικας ἐπικείμενοι ταῖς κεφαλαῖς, πίλους 
ὑψηλοὺς εἰς σχῆμα συναγομένους κωνοειδές, ἃς 
ἽἝλληνες προσαγορεύουσι κυρβασίας. παρέζωσται 
δ᾽ ἕκαστος αὐτῶν ξίφος καὶ τῇ μὲν δεξιᾷ χειρὶ 
λόγχην ἢ ῥάβδον ἤ τι τοιοῦθ᾽ ἕτερον κρατεῖ, τῇ 
δ > , / “λ Θ , ἔ ς δ᾽ > \ 
εὐωνύμῳ κατέχει πέλτην Opakiav: ἡ ἐστὶ 
ῥομβοειδεῖ θυρεῷ στενωτέρας ἔχοντι τὰς λαγόνας 
9 / “ 7 / ς \ / 
ἐμφερής, οἵας λέγονται φέρειν ot τὰ Κουρήτων 
> “ :] ~ ¢ / / 4 ε 
παρ᾽ “λλησιν ἐπιτελοῦντες ἱερά. καί εἰσιν ot 
/ \ ~ \ > \ / 1 ὝἝ, ~ 
ΖΣάλιοι κατὰ γοῦν τὴν ἐμὴν γνώμην λληνικῷ 
~ 5 ae ~ 
μεθερμηνευθέντες ὀνόματι Κουρῆτες, ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν μὲν 
σ΄ / 
ἐπὶ τῆς ἡλικίας οὕτως ὠνομασμένοι παρὰ τοὺς 
κούρους, ὑπὸ δὲ “Ρωμαίων ἐπὶ τῆς συντόνου κινή- 
\ \ > LAA θ / \ ba aAt 6... 
σεως. τὸ γὰρ ἐξάλλεσθαί τε καὶ πηδᾶν σαλῖρε ὑπ 
ἘΞ. ΄- ~ 9. 44 
αὐτῶν λέγεται. ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς αὐτῆς αἰτίας καὶ τοὺς 
> \ > / 
ἄλλους ἅπαντας ὀρχηστάς͵ ἐπεὶ κἀν τούτοις πολὺ 
7 \ / ” / > A ~ 
τὸ ἅλμα καὶ σκίρτημα ἔνεστι, παράγοντες ἀπὸ τῶν 
y rN 3, λ / 2 δὴ A > δὲ 
Σαλίων τοὔνομα σαλτάτωρας 5 καλοῦσιν. εἰ δὲ 
~ aA \ 
ὀρθῶς ὑπείληφα ταύτην αὐτοῖς τὴν προσηγορίαν 
~ Ψ ~ ¢ 
ἀποδιδοὺς ἐκ τῶν γιγνομένων ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν ὁ βουλό- 
- ~ \ 
μενος συμβαλεῖ. κινοῦνται yap πρὸς αὐλὸν ἐν 
ῥυθμῷ τὰς ἐνοπλίους κινήσεις τοτὲ μὲν ὁμοῦ, τοτὲ 
\ , Μ 
δὲ παραλλάξ. καὶ πατρίους τινὰς ὕμνους ἄδουσιν 
ἅμα ταῖς χορείαις. χορείαν δὲ καὶ κίνησιν ἐνό- 
πλιον καὶ τὸν ἐν ταῖς ἀσπίσιν ἀποτελούμενον ὑπὸ 
τῶν ἐγχειοιδίων ψόφον, εἴ τι δεῖ τοῖς ἀρχαίοις 


1 γνώμην Kiessling : γνῶσιν Bb, om. ABa. 
2 Portus: σαλάτορας AB. 


516 


BOOK ITI. 70, 2-5 


On their heads they wear apices, as they are called, 
that is, high caps contracted into the shape of a 
cone, which the Greeks call kyrbasiai. They have 
each of them a sword hanging at their girdle and 
in their right hand they hold a spear or a staff or 
something else of the sort, and on their left arm a 
Thracian buckler, which resembles a lozenge-shaped 
shield with its sides drawn in,! such as those are 
said to carry who among the Greeks perform the 
sacred rites of the Curetes. And, in my opinion 
at least, the Salii, if the word be translated into 
Greek, are Curetes, whom, because they are kouroi 
or “young men,” we call by that name from their 
age, whereas the Romans call them Salii from their 
lively motions. For to leap and skip is by them 
called salire ; and for the same reason they call all 
other dancers saltatores, deriving their name from 
the Salii, because their dancing also is attended 
by much leaping and capering. Whether I have 
been well advised or not in giving them this appel- 
lation, anyone who pleases may gather from their 
actions. For they execute their movements in 
arms, keeping time to a flute, sometimes all together, 
sometimes by turns, and while dancing sing certain 
traditional hymns. But this dance and exercise 
performed by armed men and the noise they make 
by striking their bucklers with their daggers, if we 
may base any conjectures on the ancient accounts, 


1** Lozenge-shaped ”’ here doubtless means oval. What 
have been identified as these sacred ancilia are seen 
depicted on a few ancient coins and gems. They are of 
the shape often called “ figure of eight.’”’ This was not 
the shape of the Thracian buckler, which is described as 
crescent-shaped. 

517 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τεκμηριοῦσθαι λόγοις͵ Κουρῆτες ἦσαν οἱ πρῶτοι 
/ ~ ~ 
καταστησάμενοι. τὸν δὲ περὶ αὐτῶν μῦθον οὐδὲν 
"4 \ 9 / > / A ᾽ὔ 4 
δέομαι πρὸς εἰδότας ὀλίγου δεῖν πάντας γράφειν. 
LXXI. Ἔν δὲ ταῖς πέλταις, ἃς οἵ τε ΣΖΣάλιοι 
φοροῦσι καὶ ἃς ὑπηρέται τινὲς αὐτῶν ἠρτημένας 
ἀπὸ κανόνων κομίζουσι, πολλαῖς πάνυ οὔσαις μίαν 
> / ~ ε ΄ > » ’ὔ 
εἶναι λέγουσι διοπετῆ, εὑρεθῆναι δ᾽ αὐτήν φασιν 
> an / - / A > 7 
ev τοῖς βασιλείοις τοῖς Νόμα, μηδενὸς ἀνθρώπων 
> / ΨΥ Ψ sf / > > A 
εἰσενέγκαντος μηδ᾽ ἐγνωσμένου πρότερον ἐν  Itadois 
τοιούτου σχήματος, ἐξ ὧν ἀμφοτέρων ὑπολαβεῖν 
“Ρωμαίους θεόπεμπτον εἶναι τὸ ὅπλον. βουληθέντα 
\ \ / ~ / > A / e A ~ 
de τὸν Νόμαν τιμᾶσθαί τε αὐτὸ φερόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν 
- \ 
κρατίστων νέων ἐν ἱεραῖς ἡμέραις ava τὴν πόλιν 
~ /, 
καὶ θυσιῶν ἐπετείων τυγχάνειν, δεδοικότα δὲ ἐπι- 
,ὔ \ > > >’ - \ > \ > ~ 
βουλάς τε τὰς ἀπ᾽ ἐχθρῶν καὶ ἀφανισμὸν αὐτοῦ 
- “ / \ / 
κλοπαῖον, ὅπλα λέγουσι πολλὰ κατασκευάσασθαι 
τῷ διοπετεῖ παραπλήσια, Mapopiov τινὸς δημιουρ- 
~ / 
γοῦ TO ἔργον ἀναδεξαμένου, ὥστε ἄσημον γενέσθαι 
\ / aA / >’ 7 
καὶ δυσδιάγνωστον τοῖς μέλλουσιν ἐπιβουλεύειν 
\ ~ / / \ \ 5 / 
τὴν τοῦ θεοπέμπτου φύσιν διὰ τὴν ἀπαράλλακτον 
~ 2 
τῶν ἀνθρωπείων ἔργων ὁμοιότητα. ἐπιχώριον δὲ 
> 
“Ρωμαίοις καὶ πάνυ τίμιον ὁ κουρητισμός, ὡς ἐκ 
~ / 
πολλῶν μὲν καὶ ἄλλων ἐγὼ συμβάλλομαι, μάλιστα 
~ ες 
δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν περὶ τὰς πομπὰς τάς τε ἐν ἱπποδρόμῳ 
- > ς / 
Kal Tas ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις ywopevas* ἐν ἁπάσαις γὰρ 


1 The legend that made them the protectors of the infant 
Zeus in the island of Crete; see chap. 61, 2. They were 


518 


BOOK II. 70, 5-71, 4 


was originated by the Curetes. I need not mention 
the legend ! which is related concerning them, since 
almost everybody is acquainted with it. 

LXXI. Among the vast number of bucklers which 
both the Salii themselves bear and some of their 
servants carry suspended from rods, they say there 
is one that fell from heaven and was found in the 
palace of Numa, though no one had brought it 
thither and no buckler of that shape had ever be- 
fore been known among the Italians; and that for 
both these reasons the Romans concluded that this 
buckler had been sent by the gods. They add that 
Numa, desiring that it should be honoured by being 
carried through the city on holy days by the most 
distinguished young men and that annual sacrifices 
should be offered to it, but at the same time being 
fearful both of the plots of his enemies and of its dis- 
appearance by theft, caused many other bucklers to 
be made resembling the one which fell from heaven, 
Mamutius, an artificer, having undertaken the work ; 
so that, as a result of the perfect resemblance of 
the man-made imitations, the shape of the buckler 
sent by the gods was rendered inconspicuous and 
difficult to be distinguished by those who might 
plot to possess themselves of it. This dancing after 
the manner of the Curetes was a native institution 
among the Romans and was held in great honour 
by them, as I gather from many other indications 
and especially from what takes place in their pro- 
cessions both in the Circus and in the theatres. For 


said to have clashed their spears against their shields 
in order to drown the cries of the infant Zeus, lest his 
whereabouts should be discovered. 


519 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ cf / / / > ὃ ὃ  “ 
ταύταις " πρόσηβοι κόροι χιτωνίσκους ἐνδεδυκότες 
ἐκπρεπεῖς κράνη καὶ ξίφη καὶ πάρμας ἔχοντες 
στοιχηδὸν πορεύονται, καί εἰσιν οὗτοι τῆς πομπῆς 

~ > ~ “- 
ἡγεμόνες καλούμενοι πρὸς αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τῆς παιδιᾶς 
τῆς ὑπὸ Avddv ἐξευρῆσθαι δοκούσης λυδίωνες, 
9 / e >? \ ὃ A ~ ὌΝ λί > \ ~ 
εἰκόνες ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ τῶν LaXiwv, ἐπεὶ τῶν γε 
~ δὲ Ὁ“ « Daa ὃ ~ 7.91 
Κουρητικῶν οὐδὲν ὥσπερ ot Σάλιοι δρῶσιν οὔτ᾽ ev 
Ὁ = et DOF. > 7 ~ δὲ 7 2 > θέ 
ὕμνοις οὔτ᾽ ἐν ὀρχήσει. χρῆν δὲ τούτους " ἐλευθέ- 
ρους τε εἶναι καὶ αὐθιγενεῖς καὶ ἀμφιθαλεῖς, οἱ δ᾽ 
- ἈΝ," > e / / / A ~ A / 
εἰσὶν ἐξ ὁποιασδήποτε τύχης. τί yap δεῖ τὰ πλείω 
περὶ αὐτῶν γράφειν ; 
ε A ~ ~ 

LXXII. Ἡ δὲ ἑβδόμη μοῖρα τῆς ἱερᾶς vopobe- 

σίας τῷ συστήματι προσετέθη τῶν καλουμένων φη- 

> > \ « 

τιαλίων.3 οὗτοι δ᾽ ἂν εἴησαν κατὰ τὴν ᾿λληνικὴν 
͵ / > δί 3. Ὰ νὸς Ὁ ~ 
καλούμενοι διάλεκτον εἰρηνοδίκαι. εἰσὶ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν 
5 / ” »Μ ὃ » ir ὃ \ \ ¢ / 
ἀρίστων οἴκων ἄνδρες ἐπίλεκτοι διὰ παντὸς ἱερώ- 
~ / N / ~ A / 7 \ 

μενοι τοῦ βίου, Νόμα τοῦ βασιλέως πρώτου καὶ 
τοῦτο 'Ῥωμαίοις τὸ ἱερὸν ἀρχεῖον καταστησαμένου " 

~ / ~ 
εἰ μέντοι παρὰ τῶν καλουμένων Αἰκικλῶν ὁ τὸ 
, ” ¢ ” , ” κ᾿ 
παράδειγμα ἔλαβεν ὥσπερ οἴονταί τινες, ἢ παρὰ 
- ~ / / 

τῆς Αρδεατῶν πόλεως ὡς γράφει Γέλλιος οὐκ ἔχω 
λέγειν, ἀπόχρη δὲ μοι τοσοῦτο μόνον εἰπεῖν, ὅτι πρὸ 

γειν, XP) > ρ 

~ > land » \ ~ > ~ / 
τῆς Νόμα ἀρχῆς οὔπω τὸ τῶν εἰρηνοδικῶν σύστημα 

1 ταύταις Garrer: αὐταῖς Ο. 

5 τούτους Ambrosch: αὐτοὺς Ο. 

3 φητιαλίων Kiessling, φετιαλίων Steph., Jacoby: φιτιαλίων 


A (2), φιτιάλων B. 
4Cluver: ἐκικλῶν ΑΒ, 


520 


BOOK II. 71, 4-72, 2 


in all of them young men clad in handsome tunics, 
with helmets, swords and bucklers, march in file. 
These are the leaders of the procession and are called 
by the Romans, from a game of which the Lydians 
seem to have been the inventors, ludiones ;1_ they 
show merely a certain resemblance, in my opinion, 
to the Salii, since they do not, like the Salii, do any 
of the things characteristic of the Curetes, either 
in their hymns or dancing. And it was necessary 
that the Salii should be free men and native Romans 
and that both their fathers and mothers should 
be living; whereas the others are of any condition 
whatsoever. But why should I say more about them ? 

LXXII. The seventh division of his sacred in- 
stitutions was devoted to the college of the fetiales ?; 
these may be called in Greek eirénodikai or “ arbi- 
ters of peace.” They are chosen men, from the best 
families, and exercise their holy office for life ; 
King Numa was also the first who instituted this 
holy magistracy among the Romans. But whether 
he took his example from those called the Aequicoli,? 
according to the opinion of some, or from the city 
of Ardea, as Gellius writes, I cannot say. It is 
sufficient for me to state that before Numa’s reign 
the college of the fetiales did not exist among the 


1From the well-known chapter (vii. 2) in which Livy 
describes the beginnings of drama at Rome we learn that 
these ludiones or “‘ players ’’ were at first mere dancers and 
only later pantomimists. 

2 Cf. Livy i. 24 and 32. Livy does not mention the fe- 
tiales until the reign of Numa’s successor, Tullus Hostilius. 

3 Another name for the Aequi; but in time the word 
seems to have been interpreted as meaning “ lovers of jus- 
tice” (from aeguum and colere). 


92] 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


, ar 4 ΄ > / > > A ’ 
3 παρὰ Ρωμαίοις ἦν. κατεστήσατο δ᾽ αὐτὸ Νόμας 
- 7 Μ ~ / \ 
ὅτε Φιδηνάταις ἔμελλε πολεμεῖν λῃστείας καὶ κατα- 
δρομὰς τῆς χώρας αὐτοῦ ποιησαμένοις, εἰ βούλοιντο 
~ 4 
συμβῆναι δίχα πολέμου πρὸς αὐτόν, ὅπερ εἰς avay- 
> ” > 
KT? καταστάντες ἐποίησαν. οἴομαι δέ, ἐπειδήπερ 
> ” > 7, “ \ \ \ > 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἐπιχώριον “ἔλλησι τὸ περὶ τοὺς εἰρη- 
νοδίκας ἀρχεῖον, ἀναγκαῖον εἶναί μοι πόσων καὶ 
πηλίκων ἐστὶ πραγμάτων κύριον διελθεῖν, ἵνα τοῖς 
39 - \ Ῥ / ᾿] / Δ « ’ὔ 1 + 5 
ἀγνοοῦσι THY “Ῥωμαίων εὐσέβειαν, ἣν ot τότε! ἄνδρες 
/ > ~ 
ἐπετήδευον, μὴ παράδοξον εἶναι φανῇ TO πάντας 
ΕΣ a \ / A \ / / 
αὐτοῖς τὸ κάλλιστον λαβεῖν τοὺς πολέμους τέλος. 
4 ἁπάντων γὰρ αὐτῶν τὰς ἀρχὰς καὶ τὰς ὑποθέσεις 
/ ~ 
εὐσεβεστάτας φανήσονται ποιησάμενοι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο 
> > - 
μάλιστα τοὺς θεοὺς ἐσχηκότες ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις 
~ > “ 9 
εὐμενεῖς. ἅπαντα μὲν οὖν ὅσα ἀνάκειται τούτοις 
- ~ A ~ ὔὕ 
τοῖς εἰρηνοδίκαις ἐπελθεῖν διὰ πλῆθος οὐ ῥάδιον, 
> ~ ~ > > / 
κεφαλαιώδει δ᾽ ὑπογραφῇ δηλῶσαι τοιάδ᾽ ἐστί" 
/ σ / ¢ ~ / > / 
φυλάττειν ἵνα μηδένα “Ῥωμαῖοι πόλεμον ἐξενέγκωσι 
~ » / 
κατὰ μηδεμιᾶς ἐνσπόνδου πόλεως ἄδικον, ἀρξάντων 
A \ , 
δὲ παρασπονδεῖν εἰς αὐτοὺς ἑτέρων πρεσβεύεσθαί 
~ >] ~ / > \ 
τε Kal τὰ δίκαια πρῶτον αἰτεῖν λόγῳ, ἐὰν δὲ μὴ 
- > > ~ 
πείθωνται τοῖς ἀξιουμένοις, TOT ἐπικυροῦν τὸν 
’, « / \ Ἃ > -~ / ς A 
5 πόλεμον. ὁμοίως δὲ Kav ἀδικεῖσθαί τινες ὑπὸ 
ς ,ὔ ” ὃ λέ \ OL oe 
Ρωμαίων ἔνσπονδοι λέγοντες τὰ δίκαια αἰτῶσι, 
τούτους διαγινώσκειν τοὺς ἄνδρας εἴ τι πεπόνθασιν 
/ > ~ 
ἔκσπονδον, Kat ἐὰν δόξωσι τὰ προσήκοντα ἐγκαλεῖν, 
- / > 
τοὺς ἐνόχους ταῖς αἰτίαις συλλαβόντας ἐκδότους 
- - / / κ᾿ Ἁ 
τοῖς ἀδικηθεῖσι παραδιδόναι, τά τε περὶ τοὺς 


1 τότε Bb: τε ABa, 
522 


BOOK IT. 72, 3-5 


Romans. It was instituted by Numa when he was 
upon the point of making war on the people of 
Fidenae, who had raided and ravaged his territories, 
in order to see whether they would come to an accom- 
modation with him without war; and that is what 
they actually did, being constrained by necessity. 
But since the college of the fetiales is not in use 
among the Greeks, I think it incumbent on me to 
relate how many and how great affairs fall under its 
jurisdiction, to the end that those who are un- 
acquainted with the piety practised by the Romans 
of those times may not be surprised to find that 
all their wars had the most successful outcome; for 
it will appear that the origins and motives of them 
all were most holy, and for this reason especially 
the gods were propitious to them in the dangers 
that attended them. The multitude of duties, to be 
sure, that fall within the province of these fetiales 
makes it no easy matter to enumerate them all; but 
to indicate them by a summary outline, they are as 
follows: It is their duty to take care that the 
Romans do not enter upon an unjust war against 
any city in alliance with them, and if others begin 
the violation of treaties against them, to go as ambas- 
sadors and first make formal demand for justice, 
and then, if the others refuse to comply with their 
demands, to sanction war. In like manner, if any 
people in alliance with the Romans complain of 
having been injured by them and demand justice, 
these men are to determine whether they have suf- 
fered anything in violation of their alliance; and 
if they find their complaints well grounded, they are 
to seize the accused and deliver them up to the 
injured parties. They are also to take cognizance 


923 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


\ > / / \ \ \ ‘ 
πρεσβευτὰς ἀδικήματα δικάζειν καὶ τὰ περὶ τὰς 
συνθήκας ὅσια φυλάττειν εἰρήνην τε ποιεῖσθαι 

\ / gh \ \ A c / 
καὶ γεγενημένην, ἐὰν μὴ κατὰ τοὺς ἱεροὺς δόξῃ 
~ > ~ ~ 
πεπρᾶχθαι νόμους, ἀκυροῦν καὶ Tas τῶν στρατη- 
- ΄σ σ΄ 
γῶν παρανομίας, ὅσαι περί τε ὅρκους καὶ σπονδὰς 
> ~ ~ 
ἐπιτελοῦνται, διαγινώσκοντας ἀφοσιοῦσθαι, περὶ ὧν 

\ 3 ’ὔ 

κατὰ τοὺς οἰκείους καιροὺς ποιήσομαι τὸν λόγον. 
> ~ 
τὰ δὲ περὶ Tas ἐπικηρυκείας ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν γινόμενα, 
σ \ / 3 “- / > ~ / ΝΜ 
ὅτε τὴν δόξασαν ἀδικεῖν πόλιν αἰτοῖεν δίκας (ἄξιον 
\ δὲ arp [9 - A NAT ὃ ~ 
γὰρ μηδὲ ταῦτ᾽ ἀγνοεῖν κατὰ πολλὴν φροντίδα τῶν 
~ 7 
ὁσίων καὶ δικαίων γινόμενα) τοιαῦτα παρέλαβον " 
> ~ ~ Δ ε 
εἷς μὲν ἐκ τῶν εἰρηνοδικῶν, ὃν ot λοιποὶ προχειρί- 
> ~ \ ¢ - 
σαιντο, κεκοσμημένος ἐσθῆτι καὶ φορήμασιν ἱεροῖς, 
σ / Ss \ \ » > \ ~ 
ἵνα διάδηλος 7 Tapa τοὺς ἄλλους, εἰς THY τῶν 
/ ‘ ~ 
ἀδικούντων παρεγίνετο πόλιν: ἐπιστὰς δὲ Tots 
CxS , , \ \ » > = 
ὁρίοις τόν te Δία Kai τοὺς ἄλλους ἐπεκαλεῖτο 
~ σ 
θεοὺς μαρτυρόμενος ὅτι δίκας αἰτῶν ἥκει ὑπὲρ᾽ 
΄ γ᾿ / <4 
τῆς Ῥωμαίων πόλεως ἔπειτα ὀμόσας ὅτι πρὸς 
~ \ > A 4 > 
ἀδικοῦσαν ἔρχεται πόλιν καὶ ἀρὰς τὰς μεγίστας εἰ 
ε ~ \ ψῳ OF 4 
ψεύδοιτο ἐπαρασάμενος ἑαυτῷ τε καὶ τῇ “Ῥώμῃ, 
~ “ ” σ΄ / 
TOT ἐντὸς ἤει τῶν ὅρων - ἔπειτα ὅτῳ πρώτῳ περι- 
~ / ww ~ > / 
τύχοι τοῦτον ἐπιμαρτυράμενος, εἴτε τῶν ἀγροίκων 
~ ~ ” \ \ \ 
εἴτε τῶ» πολιτικῶν εἴη, Kal Tas αὐτὰς προσθεὶς 
‘ Ss ‘\ > \ 
ἀρὰς πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ᾧχετο, κᾷτα πρὶν εἰς τὴν 
΄- \ Ἃ \ ~ > 
πόλιν παρελθεῖν τὸν πυλωρὸν ἢ τὸν πρῶτον ἅπαν- 
- / > 
τήσαντα ἐν ταῖς πύλαις τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον ἐπι- 
\ > 4 / > -“ A 
μαρτυράμενος εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν προΐει. ἐκεῖ δὲ 


1 ὑπὲρ Hertlein, following Reiske; παρὰ Kiessling: περὶ 
O, Jacoby. 


924 


BOOK II. 72, 5-7 


of the crimes committed against ambassadors, to 
take care that treaties are religiously observed, to 
make peace, and if they find that peace has been made 
otherwise than is prescribed by the holy laws, to 
set it aside ; and to inquire into and expiate the trans- 
gressions of the generals in so far as they relate to 
oaths and treaties, concerning which [ shall speak in 
the proper places. As to the functions they per- 
formed in the quality of heralds when they went to 
demand justice of any city thought to have injured 
the Romans (for these things also are worthy of 
our knowledge, since they were carried out with great 
regard to both religion and justice), I have received 
the following account: One of these fetiales, chosen 
by his colleagues, wearing his sacred robes and in- 
signia to distinguish him from all others, proceeded 
towards the city whose inhabitants had done the 
injury ; and, stopping at the border, he called upon 
Jupiter and the rest of the gods to witness that he 
was come to demand justice on behalf of the Roman 
State. Thereupon he took an oath that he was going 
to a city that had done an injury; and having uttered 
the most dreadful imprecations against himself and 
Rome, if what he averred was not true, he then 
entered their borders. Afterwards, he called to 
witness the first person he met, whether it was one 
of the countrymen or one of the townspeople, 
and having repeated the same imprecations, he 
advanced towards the city. And before he entered 
it he called to witness in the same manner the gate- 
keeper or the first person he met at the gates, after 
which he proceeded to the forum; and taking his 


925 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Ἁ an > a 
καταστὰς τοῖς ev τέλει περὶ ὧν ἧκοι διελέγετο 
~ /, 
πανταχῇ τούς τε ὅρκους καὶ τὰς ἀρὰς προστιθείς. 
» 
εἰ μὲν οὖν ὑπέχοιεν τὰς δίκας παραδιδόντες τοὺς ἐν 
- Eo ἢ > 7 A Ν > / 7 
ταῖς αἰτίαις, ἀπήει τοὺς ἄνδρας ἀπάγων φίλος τε 
"ὃ A \ A λ ᾿ > δὲ / > 
ἤδη γεγονὼς καὶ παρὰ φίλων: εἰ δὲ χρόνον εἰς 
\ 
βουλὴν αἰτήσαιντο δέκα διδοὺς ἡμέρας παρεγίνετο 
/ \ / / > / > / 
πάλιν καὶ μέχρι τρίτης αἰτήσεως ἀνεδέχετο. διελ- 
θουσῶν δὲ τῶν τριάκοντα ἡμερῶν, εἰ μὴ παρεῖχεν 
αὐτῷ τὰ δίκαια ἡ πόλις, ἐπικαλεσάμενος τούς τε 
οὐρανίους καὶ καταχθονίους θεοὺς ἀπήει, τοσοῦτο 
ἊΡ > A 7 / \ > ~ « °P. 
μόνον εἰπὼν ὅτι βουλεύσεται περὶ αὐτῶν ἡ “Pw- 
μαίων πόλις ἐφ᾽ ἡσυχίας. καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο ἀπέ- 
> \ A “ - Μ ᾿» ,ὔ 
φαινεν εἰς τὴν βουλὴν ἅμα τοῖς ἄλλοις εἰρηνοδίκαις 
παραγενόμενος ὅτι πέπρακται πᾶν αὐτοῖς ὅσον ἦν 
“ > ~ ¢ ~ / Ἁ > / / 
ὅσιον ἐκ τῶν ἱερῶν νόμων καὶ εἰ βούλοιντο ψηφί- 
~ > A ~ 
ζεσθαι πόλεμον οὐδὲν ἔσται TO κωλῦσον ἀπὸ θεῶν. 
? / \ / / Μ ε An / => 
εἰ δέ τι μὴ γένοιτο τούτων οὔτε ἡ βουλὴ κυρία ἦν 
> 7ὔ / yy e ~ A \ 
ἐπιψηφίσασθαι πόλεμον οὔτε ὁ δῆμος. περὶ μὲν 
οὖν τῶν εἰρηνοδικῶν τοσαῦτα παρελάβομεν. 
- 1p ~ / / 
LXXIII. Τελευταῖος δ᾽ ἦν τῆς Nowa διατάξεως 
~ ~ 7 ¢ \ / 
μερισμὸς ὑπὲρ τῶν ἱερῶν, ὧν ἔλαχον ot THY μεγίστην 
παρὰ “Ρωμαίοις ἱερατείαν καὶ ἐξουσίαν ἔχοντες. 
= ~ DP ie Ὁ ~ 
οὗτοι κατὰ μὲν τὴν ἑαυτῶν διάλεκτον ἐφ᾽ ἑνὸς τῶν 
Ἁ / 
ἔργων ὃ πράττουσιν ἐπισκευάζοντες τὴν ξυλίνην 
\ ~ 
γέφυραν ποντίφικες προσαγορεύονται, εἰσὶ δὲ τῶν 





1Cf. Livy i. 20, ὅ--Ἰ. 
2 According to Dionysius himself (iii. 45) the pons 
sublicius was built by Ancus Marcius ; but it will be noted 


526 


BOOK II. 72, 7-73, 1 


stand there, he discussed with the magistrates the 
reasons for his coming, adding everywhere the same 
oaths and imprecations. If, then, they were dis- 
posed to offer satisfaction by delivering up the 
guilty, he departed as a friend taking leave of friends, 
carrying the prisoners with him. Or, if they desired 
time to deliberate, he allowed them ten days, after 
which he returned and waited till they had made 
this request three times. But after the expiration 
of the thirty days, if the city still persisted in re- 
fusing to grant him justice, he called both the celes- 
tial and infernal gods to witness and went away, 
saying no more than this, that the Roman State 
would deliberate at its leisure concerning these people. 
Afterwards he, together with the other fetiales, ap- 
peared before the senate and declared that they had 
done everything that was ordained by the holy laws, 
and that, if the senators wished to vote for war, there 
would be no obstacle on the part of the gods. But 
if any of these things was omitted, neither the senate 
nor the people had the power to vote for war. Such, 
then, is the account we have received concerning the 
fetiales. 

LXXIII. The last branch of the ordinances of 
Numa related to the sacred offices allotted to those 
who held the highest priesthood and the greatest 
power among the Romans.'! These, from one of the 
duties they perform, namely, the repairing of the 
wooden bridge,” are in their own language called 
pontifices ; but they have jurisdiction over the most 


that he does not say explicitly that these priests bore the 
name pontifices from the first. 


527 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ rd 
μεγίστων πραγμάτων κύριοι. καὶ yap δικάζουσιν 
- \ € \ ¢ / 
οὗτοι Tas ἱερὰς δίκας ἁπάσας ἰδιώταις τε Kal 
ΝΜ, \ ~ ~ ~ 
ἄρχουσι Kat λειτουργοῖς θεῶν καὶ νομοθετοῦσιν 
“ ~ ς ~ 
ὅσα τῶν ἱερῶν͵ ἄγραφα ὄντα καὶ avébiora,! ἐπιτή- 
/ - ~ 
deva τυγχάνειν αὐτοῖς φανείη νόμων Te Kal ἐθισμῶν - 
/ > A ε 7 a 
τάς τε ἀρχὰς ἁπάσας, ὅσαις θυσία tis ἢ θεραπεία 
~ > 4 « ~ 
θεῶν ἀνάκειται, καὶ τοὺς ἱερεῖς ἅπαντας ἐξετά- 
ς / 3 ~ \ 
Covow, ὑπηρέτας τε αὐτῶν καὶ λειτουργούς, οἷς 
~ \ \ ¢ / a / 
χρῶνται πρὸς τὰ ἱερά, οὗτοι φυλάττουσι μηδὲν 
/ \ ς - 
ἐξαμαρτάνειν περὶ 2 τοὺς ἱεροὺς νόμους - τοῖς TE 
“ςς 7 εὐλίς \ é 
ἰδιώταις ὁπόσοι μὴ ἴσασι τοὺς περὶ τὰ θεῖα ἢ 
δαιμόνια σεβασμούς, ἐξηγηταὶ γίνονται καὶ προ- 
~ A 
φῆται: Kat εἴ τινας αἴσθοιντο μὴ πειθομένους 
- > A ~ ~ \ - 
ταῖς ἐπιταγαῖς αὐτῶν, ζημιοῦσι πρὸς ἕκαστον 
- ~ / > / 4 / 
χρῆμα ὁρῶντες, εἰσί τε ἀνυπεύθυνοι πάσης δίκης 
‘ / ” lod , > / ww 
te καὶ ζημίας οὔτε βουλῇ λόγον ἀποδιδόντες οὔτε 
ὃ 7 \ ame ee ~ ¢ ~ Sa σ > 5A / 
ήμῳ, περὶ γοῦν" τῶν ἱερῶν. ὥστε εἰ βούλεταί 
» A ¢ / A ” ce / 
τις αὐτοὺς ἱεροδιδασκάλους καλεῖν εἴτε ἱερονόμους 
” ¢ / » e ε A > ~ « 7 
εἴτε ἱεροφύλακας εἴτε, ὡς ἡμεῖς ἀξιοῦμεν, ἱεροφάν- 
A > ~ > 7 
τας, οὐχ ἁμαρτήσεται τοῦ ἀληθοῦς. ἐκλιπόντος 
«-- 4 » A > / 
δέ twos αὐτῶν tov βίον ἕτερος εἰς τὸν ἐκείνου 
ε \ ~ / ¢ / 
καθίσταται τόπον οὐχ ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου αἱρεθείς, 
2\\>2 ἐς >? ye a gt Oty Al ts a 5 ΄ a 
ἀλλ᾽ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐκείνων, ὃς av ἐπιτηδειότατος εἶναι 
an ~ ~ / \ \ ¢ , 
δοκῇ τῶν πολιτῶν " παραλαμβάνει δὲ THY ἱερατείαν 
1 κρίνοντες ἃ ἂν after ἀνέθιστα deleted by Kiessling. Reiske 
rejected κρίνοντες, reading ἀνέθιστα νομίζωσιν ἀποδοχῆς ἄξια 
εἶναι: ἀκυροῦσι δὲ ἃ ἂν ἀνεπιτήδεια «.7.€. Jacoby retained 
κρίνοντες ἃ av, indicating a lacuna before these words. 
Σ περὶ Ab: παρὰ AaB. 8 γοῦν Kiessling: οὖν Ο. 
4 ἱερῶν Kiessling: ἱερέων Ο. 


528 


BOOK II. 73, 2-3 


weighty matters. For they are the judges in all 
religious causes wherein private citizens, magistrates 
or the ministers of the gods are concerned; they 
make laws for the observance of any religious rites, 
not established by written law or by custom, which 
may seem to them worthy of receiving the sanction 
of law and custom ; they inquire into the conduct of 
all magistrates to whom the performance of any 
sacrifice or other religious duty is committed, and 
also into that of all the priests; they take care 
that their servants and ministers whom they employ 
in religious rites commit no error in the matter of 
the sacred laws ; to the laymen who are unacquainted 
with such matters they are the expounders and inter- 
preters of everything relating to the worship of the 
gods and genii; and if they find that any disobey 
their orders, they inflict punishment upon them 
with due regard to every offence; moreover, they are 
not liable to any prosecution or punishment, nor are 
they accountable to the senate or to the people, at 
least concerning religious matters. Hence, if anyone 
wishes to call them hierodidaskaloi, hieronomoi, 
hierophylakes, or, as 1 think proper, hierophantai,} 
he will not be in error. When one of them dies, 
another is appointed in his place, being chosen, 
not by the people, but by the pontifices themselves, 
who select the person they think best qualified 
among their fellow citizens; and the one thus 


? These words mean respectively “teachers of religion,” 
“supervisors of religion,’ “guardians of religion” and 
‘interpreters of religion.”’ The last is the term regularly 
employed by Dionysius when he translates the word 
pontifices. 


529 
VOL. I. T 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ὁ δοκιμασθείς, ἐὰν εὐόρνιθες αὐτῷ τύχωσιν οἰωνοὶ 
γενόμενοι. τὰ μὲν δὴ περὶ τὸ θεῖον νομοθετηθέντα 
ὑπὸ τοῦ Νόμα καὶ διαιρεθέντα κατὰ τὰς συμμορίας 
τῶν ἱερῶν, ἐξ ὧν εὐσεβεστέραν συνέβη γενέσθαι 
τὴν πόλιν, πρὸς τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐλάττοσι τὰ μέγιστα 
καὶ φανερώτατα ταῦτ᾽ ἦν. 

LXXIV. Τὰ δ᾽ εἰς εὐτέλειάν τε καὶ σωφροσύνην 
ἄγοντα τὸν ἑκάστου βίον καὶ εἰς ἐπιθυμίαν κατα- 
στήσαντα τῆς φυλαττούσης ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ τὴν πόλιν 
δικαιοσύνης πλεῖστα ὅσα, τὰ μὲν ἐγγράφοις περιλη- 
φθέντα νόμοις, τὰ δ᾽ ἔξω γραφῆς εἰς ἐπιτηδεύσεις 
ἀχθέντα καὶ συνασκήσεις χρονίους - ὑπὲρ ὧν ἁπάν- 
των μὲν πολὺ ἂν ἔργον εἴη λέγειν, ἀρκέσει δὲ δύο 
τὰ μεγίστης μνήμης τυχόντα τεκμήρια καὶ τῶν 
ἄλλων γενέσθαι" τῆς μὲν αὐταρκείας καὶ τοῦ μη- 
δένα τῶν ἀλλοτρίων ἐπιθυμεῖν ἡ περὶ τοὺς ὁρισμοὺς 
τῶν κτήσεων νομοθεσία. κελεύσας γὰρ ἑκάστῳ 
περιγράψαι τὴν ἑαυτοῦ κτῆσιν καὶ στῆσαι λίθους 
ἐπὶ τοῖς ὅροις ἱεροὺς ἀπέδειξεν ‘Opiov Διὸς τοὺς 
λίθους, καὶ θυσίας ἔταξεν αὐτοῖς ἐπιτελεῖν ἅπαντας 
ἡμέρᾳ τακτῇ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐνιαυτὸν ἐπὶ τὸν τόπον 
συνερχομένους, ἑορτὴν ἐν Tots! πάνυ τιμίαν 5 τὴν 
τῶν δρίων θεῶν καταστησάμενος. ταύτην ἱ Ῥωμαῖοι 
Τερμινάλια καλοῦσιν ἐπὶ τῶν τερμόνων καὶ τοὺς 
ὅρους αὐτοὺς ἑνὸς ἀλλαγῇ γράμματος παρὰ τὴν 
ἡμετέραν διάλεκτον ἐκφέροντες τέρμινας ὃ προσα- 


1 τοῖς Meineke: ταῖς Ο. 

2 καὶ after τιμίαν deleted by Biicheler. 

8 χέρμινας B, τερμῖνας A; probably an error for τέρμινα or 
τερμίνους. 


530 


BOOK II. 73, 3-74, 3 


approved of receives the priesthood, provided the 
omens are favourable to him. These—not to speak 
of others less important—are the greatest and the 
most notable regulations made by Numa concerning 
religious worship and divided by him according 
to the different classes of sacred rites; and through 
these it came about that the city increased in 
piety. 

LXXIV. His regulations, moreover, that tended 
to inspire frugality and moderation in the life of 
the individual citizen and to create a passion for 
justice, which preserves the harmony of the State, 
were exceedingly numerous, some of them being 
comprehended in written laws, and others not written 
down but embodied in custom and long usage. To 
treat of all these would be a difficult task; but 
mention of the two of them which have been most 
frequently cited will suffice to give evidence of the 
rest. First, to the end that people should be con- 
tent with what they had and should not covet what 
belonged to others, there was the law that appointed 
boundaries to every man’s possessions. For, having 
ordered every one to draw a line around his own land 
and to place stones on the bounds, he consecrated 
these stones to Jupiter Terminalis and ordained 
that all should assemble at the place every year on 
a fixed day and offer sacrifices to them; and he 
made the festival in honour of these gods of 
boundaries among the most dignified of all. This 
festival the Romans call Terminalia, from the 
boundaries. and the boundaries themselves, by the 
change of one letter as compared with our language, 


531 
ΤῈ 


or 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ > ‘ 3 ͵ BD ΄ \ 
yopevovaw. εἰ δέ τις ἀφανίσειεν ἢ μεταθείη τοὺς 
- ~ ~ ) 
ὅρους, ἱερὸν ἐνομοθέτησεν εἶναι τοῦ θεοῦ τὸν τού- 
σ ΄“ / 
των τι διαπραξάμενον, va τῷ βουλομένῳ κτείνειν 
αὐτὸν ὡς ἱερόσυλον ἥ τε ἀσφάλεια καὶ τὸ καθαρῷ 
ς ἱερ ἥ ρῷ 
͵ὔ “-“- ~ > > > % ~ 
μιάσματος εἶναι προσῇ. τοῦτο δ᾽ οὐκ ἐπὶ τῶν 
~ / \ / 
ἰδιωτικῶν κατεστήσατο μόνον κτήσεων TO δίκαιον, 
~ Ὁ / 
ἀλλὰ Kal ἐπὶ τῶν δημοσίων, ὅροις κἀκείνας περι- 
/ a A A « / ~ > 4 - > ͵7 
λαβών, ἵνα καὶ τὴν “Ρωμαίων γῆν ἀπὸ τῆς ἀστυγεί- 
- \ \ Ἁ \ 3 A ~ 
Tovos ὅριοι διαιρῶσι θεοὶ Kat τὴν κοινὴν ἀπὸ τῆς 
~ > ε ~ 
ἰδίας. τούτουϊ μέχρι τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς χρόνων 
~ ¢ ~ 
2 τῆς ὁσίας αὐτῆς 
ἕνεκα. θεούς τε γὰρ ἡγοῦνται τοὺς τέρμονας καὶ 


φυλάττουσι “Ῥωμαῖοι μνημεῖα 


θ / > A e ‘ ~ \ > Ι 7 35 / > 
vovow αὐτοῖς ὁσέτη, τῶν μὲν ἐμψύχων οὐδέν (od 
A σ « / Α / / \ 

γὰρ ὅσιον αἱμάττειν τοὺς λίθους), meAdvous δὲ δη- 

2, ~ > ~ 
μητρίους ὃ καὶ ἄλλας τινὰς καρπῶν ἀπαρχάς. ἐχρῆν 
δὲ καὶ τὸ ἔργον ἔτι φυλάττειν αὐτούς, od* χάριν 

« « 
θεοὺς ἐνόμισε" τοὺς τέρμονας ὁ Νόμας," ἱκανουμέ- 
- ~ ~ De as? 

vous τοῖς ἑαυτῶν κτήμασι, τῶν δ᾽ ἀλλοτρίων μήτε 


1 τούτου Schmitz: τοῦτο O, Jacoby. 

2 Before μνημεῖα the MSS. have τοῦ χρόνου, deleted, how- 
ever, in B. Casaubon regarded these words as corrupt; 
Reiske emended to τοῦ ἀρχαίου or τοῦ τότε χρόνου, Biicheler 
to τοῦ νόμου. 

3 Meineke: δήμητρος Ο. 

4 αὐτούς, οὗ Canter, αὐτούς, ὅτου Portus, αὐτό, οὗ Sylburg, 
ἅπαντας, οὗ Reiske, πιστὸν αὐτούς, οὗ Jacoby, ἀπὸ τοῦ ἴσου, οὗ 
Ambrosch, Sintenis: ἀπυτουάσου A, ἀπαυτου.. ου B (but last 
ov changed to οὗ by Bb). 

5 ἐνόμισε Biicheler: ἐνόμισαν O. 

8 ὁ Nopas Biicheler: ὁνομάσαι Ba, ὀνομάσαι BbR. 


532 


BOOK II. 74, 3-5 - 


they call termines.!_ He also enacted that, if any 
person demolished or displaced these boundary stones 
he should be looked upon as devoted to the god, to 
the end that anyone who wished might kill him as 
a sacrilegious person with impunity and without 
incurring any stain of guilt. He established this 
law with reference not only to private possessions 
but also to those belonging to the public; for he 
marked these also with boundary stones, to the 
end that the gods of boundaries might distinguish 
the lands of the Romans from those of their neigh- 
bours, and the public lands from such as belonged 
to private persons. Memorials of this custom are ob- 
served by the Romans down to our times, purely 
as areligiousform. For they look upon these bound- 
ary stones as gods and sacrifice to them yearly, 
offering up no kind of animal (for it is not lawful 
to stain these stones with blood), but cakes made 
of cereals and other first-fruits of the earth. But 
they ought still to observe the motive, as well, 
which led Numa to regard these boundary stones 
as gods and content themselves with their own 
possessions without appropriating those of others 


1 When Dionysius says that the Latin and Greek words 
differ by only one letter he is almost certainly referring 
to the stem (fermin- : repuov-) or to the nominative sin- 
gular (termen : répuwv); he would naturally disregard 
the case-endings, since he regularly inflects Latin words 
as if they were Greek. The form τέρμινας, i.e. terminés, 
ean hardly be from the hand of Dionysius, who must have 
known that most nouns terminating in -men were neuter 
(compare his κάρμινα, carmina, in i. 31). The true form 
here should evidently be either τέρμινα or reppivous, i.e. 
termina or termini (to cite them in the nominative). 


933 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


/ ΄ \ / / ~ > ΕἸ 
βίᾳ σφετεριζομένους μηδὲν μήτε δόλῳ. νῦν δ οὐχ 
ὡς ἄμεινον οὐδ᾽ ὡς οἱ πρόγονοι παρέδοσαν ὁρίζουσί 

5 \ ~ a 
τινες ἀπὸ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων τὰ οἰκεῖα, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν ad- 

- ΄ =~ 
τοῖς ὅρος τῶν κτήσεων οὐχ ὁ νόμος, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ πάντων 
> θ / ~ > aA / > + Oe. \ \ / 
ἐπιθυμία, πρᾶγμα od καλόν. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων 
ἑτέροις ! παρίεμεν σκοπεῖν. 

« 

LXXV. Ὃ δὲ Νόμας εἰς μὲν εὐτέλειαν καὶ 
σωφροσύνην διὰ τοιούτων συνέστειλε 3 νόμων τὴν 
/ > \ \ \ A / / 
πόλιν, εἰς δὲ THY περὶ τὰ συμβόλαια δικαιοσύνην 

/ ~ > > 
ὑπηγάγετο πρᾶγμα ἐξευρὼν ἠγνοημένον ὑπὸ πάν- 
των τῶν καταστησαμένων τὰς ἐλλογίμους πολιτείας. 
« ~ \ 4 ~ / > “- 
ὁρῶν γὰρ ὅτι τῶν συμβολαίων τὰ μὲν ἐν φανερῷ 
καὶ μετὰ μαρτύρων πραττόμενα ἡ τῶν συνόντων 
αἰδὼς φυλάττει, καὶ σπάνιοί τινές εἰσιν οἵ περὶ τὰ 
τοιαῦτα ἀδικοῦντες, τὰ δὲ ἀμάρτυρα πολλῷ πλείω 
~ \ ~ 
TOV ἑτέρων ὄντα μίαν ἔχει φυλακὴν THY TOV ovp- 
/ ~ 
βαλόντων πίστιν, περὶ ταύτην ᾧετο δεῖν σπουδάσαι 
παντὸς ἄλλου μάλιστα καὶ ποιῆσαι θείων σεβασμῶν 
» / / \ \ \ / \ / \ 
ἀξίαν. Δίκην μὲν yap καὶ Θέμιν καὶ Νέμεσιν καὶ 

A / 2) La > / \ - 
τὰς καλουμένας παρ᾽ “Ἕλλησιν ᾿Ερινύας καὶ ὅσα 
τούτοις ὅμοια ὑπὸ τῶν πρότερον ἀποχρώντως ἐκ- 
τεθειῶσθαί τε καὶ καθωσιῶσθαι ἐνόμισε, {Πίστιν 
δέ, ἧς οὔτε μεῖζον οὔτε ἱερώτερον πάθος ἐν ἀνθρώ- 

~ + RP A 
ποις οὐδέν, οὔπω σεβασμῶν τυγχάνειν οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς 
~ ~ > ~ 
κοινοῖς τῶν πόλεων πράγμασιν οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἰδίοις. 
~ ~ ¢ A 
ταῦτα δὴ διανοηθεὶς πρῶτος ἀνθρώπων ἱερὸν 
ἱδρύσατο Πίστεως δημοσίας καὶ θυσίας αὐτῇ κατ- 
εστήσατο, καθάπερ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις θεοῖς, δημο- 


1Steph.: ἐν ἑτέροις AB. 
2 συνέστειλε B: συνέστησε R. 


534 


BOOK II. 74, 5-75, 3 


either by violence or by fraud; whereas now there 
are some who, in disregard of what is best and of 
the example of their ancestors, instead of dis- 
tinguishing that which is theirs from that which 
belongs to others, set as bounds to their possessions, 
not the law, but their greed to possess everything, 
—which is disgraceful behaviour. But we leave the 
considerations of these matters to others. 

LXXY. By such laws Numa brought the State 
to frugality and moderation. And in order to 
encourage the observance of justice in the matter 
of contracts, he hit upon a device which was unknown 
to all who have established the most celebrated con- 
stitutions. For, observing that contracts made in 
public and before witnesses are, out of respect for 
the persons present, generally observed and that 
few are guilty of any violation of them, but that 
those which are made without witnesses—and these 
are much more numerous than the others—rest on 
no other security than the faith of those who make 
them, he thought it incumbent on him to make this 
faith the chief object of his care and to render it 
worthy of divine worship. For he felt that Justice, 
Themis, Nemesis, and those the Greeks call Erinyes, 
with other concepts of the kind, had been suffi- 
ciently revered and worshipped as gods by the men 
of former times, but that Faith, than which there is 
nothing greater nor more sacred among men, was 
not yet worshipped either by states in their public 
capacity or by private persons. As the result of 
these reflexions he, first of all men, erected a temple 
to the Public Faith and instituted sacrifices in her 
honour at the public expense in the same manner as 


939 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


τελεῖς. ἔμελλε δὲ ἄρα σὺν χρόνῳ τὸ κοινὸν τῆς 
πόλεως ἦθος πιστὸν καὶ βέβαιον πρὸς ἀνθρώπους 
γενόμενον τοιούτους ἀπεργάσασθαι καὶ τοὺς τῶν 
ἰδιωτῶν τρόπους. οὕτω γοῦν σεβαστόν τι πρᾶγμα 
καὶ ἀμίαντον ἐνομίσθη τὸ πιστόν, ὥστε ὅρκον τε 
μέγιστον γενέσθαι τὴν ἰδίαν ἑκάστῳ πίστιν καὶ 
μαρτυρίας συμπάσης ἰσχυροτάτην, καὶ ὁπότε ὑπὲρ 
ἀμαρτύρου συναλλάγματος ἀμφίλογόν τι γένοιτο ἑνὶ 
πρὸς ἕνα, ἡ διαιροῦσα τὸ νεῖκος καὶ προσωτέρω 
χωρεῖν οὐκ ἐῶσα τὰς φιλονεικίας ἡ θατέρου τῶν 
διαδικαζομένων αὐτῶν πίστις ἦν, αἵ τε ἀρχαὶ καὶ 
τὰ δικαστήρια τὰ πλεῖστα τῶν ἀμφισβητημάτων 
τοῖς ἐκ τῆς πίστεως ὅρκοις διήτων. τοιαῦτα μὲν 
δὴ σωφροσύνης τε παρακλητικὰ καὶ δικαιοσύνης 
ἀναγκαστήρια ὑπὸ τοῦ Νόμα τότε ἐξευρεθέντα 
κοσμιωτέραν οἰκίας τῆς κράτιστα οἰκουμένης τὴν 
“Ρωμαίων πόλιν ἀπειργάσατο. 

LXXVI. A δὲ μέλλω νῦν λέγειν ἐπιμελῆ τε 
αὐτὴν ἀπέδωκε τῶν ἀναγκαίων καὶ τῶν ἀγαθῶν 
ἐργάτιν. ἐνθυμούμενος γὰρ ὁ ἀνήρ, ὅτι πόλιν τὴν 
μέλλουσαν ἀγαπήσειν τὰ δίκαια καὶ μενεῖν 5 ἐν τῷ 
σώφρονι βίῳ τῆς ἀναγκαίου δεῖ χορηγίας εὐπορεῖν, 
διεῖλε τὴν χώραν ἅπασαν εἰς τοὺς καλουμένους 
πάγους καὶ κατέστησεν ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου τῶν πάγων 
ἄρχοντα ἐπίσκοπόν τε καὶ περίπολον τῆς ἰδίας 
μοίρας. οὗτοι γὰρ περιιόντες θαμινὰ τοὺς εὖ τε 

1 διήτων. τοιαῦτα Kiessling: διητωντο᾽ ταῦτα Β, διήτων" 


ταῦτα R. 
2 μενεῖν Kiessling: μένειν Ο. 


990 


BOOK II. 75, 3-76, 2 


to the rest of the gods.1_ And in truth the result was 
bound to be that this attitude of good faith and 
constancy on the part of the State toward all men 
would in the course of time render the behaviour 
of the individual citizens similar. In any case, so 
revered and inviolable a thing was good faith in 
their estimation, that the greatest oath a man could 
take was by his own faith, and this had greater 
weight than all the testimony taken together. And 
if there was any dispute between one-man and 
another concerning a contract entered into without 
witnesses, the faith of either of the parties was 
sufficient to decide the controversy and prevent it 
from going any farther. And the magistrates and 
courts of justice based their decisions in most causes 
on the oaths of the parties attesting by their faith. 
Such regulations, devised by Numa at that time to 
encourage moderation and enforce justice, rendered 
the Roman State more orderly than the best regu- 
lated household. 

LXXVI. But the measures which I am now going 
to relate made it both careful to provide itself with 
necessaries and industrious in acquiring the ad- 
vantages that flow from labour. For this man, 
considering that a State which was to love justice 
and to continue in the practice of moderation ought 
to abound in all things necessary to the support of 
life, divided the whole country into what are called 
pagi or “ districts,” and over each of these districts 
he appointed an official whose duty it was to inspect 
and visit the lands lying in his own jurisdiction. 
These men, going their rounds frequently, made a 


1 Of. Livy i. 21, 1 and 4. 
537 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


Kal κακῶς εἰργασμένους τῶν ἀγρῶν ἀπεγράφοντο 
καὶ πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα ἀπέφαινον, ὁ δὲ τοὺς μὲν 
> - 
ἐπιμελεῖς γεωργοὺς ἐπαίνοις τε καὶ φιλανθρωπίαις 
> λ / \ ὃ \ > \ 1 > ὃ ΄ ‘ 
ἀνελάμβανε, τοὺς δὲ ἀργοὺς ὀνειδίζων τε Kal 
ζημιῶν ἐπὶ τὸ θεραπεύειν ἄμεινον τὴν γῆν mpov- 
τρέπετο. τοιγάρτοι πολέμων τε ἀπηλλαγμένοι καὶ 
τῶν κατὰ πόλιν πραγμάτων σχολὴν πολλὴν ἄγοντες 
5» 
ἀργίας τε καὶ βλακείας σὺν αἰσχύνῃ τίνοντες δίκας 
αὐτουργοὶ. πάντες ἐγίνοντο καὶ τὸν ἐκ γῆς πλοῦτον 
ε ~ ~ 
ἁπάντων ὄντα 3 δικαιότατον τῆς στρατιωτικῆς Kal 
οὐκ ἐχούσης τὸ βέβαιον εὐπορίας γλυκύτερον ἐτί- 
θεντο. τῷ δὲ Νόμᾳ περιῆν ἐκ τούτων φιλεῖσθαι 
μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρχομένων, ζηλοῦσθαι δ᾽ ὑπὸ τῶν 
περιοίκων͵ μνημονεύεσθαι δ᾽ ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιγινομένων " 
> € v / > / 8 A a 
du’ ὧν οὔτε στάσις ἐμφύλιος τὴν πολιτικὴν ἔλυσεν 
\ ~ / 
ὁμόνοιαν, οὔτε πόλεμος ἀλλοεθνὴς ἐκ τῶν κρατί- 
στων καὶ θαυμασιωτάτων τὴν πόλιν ἐπιτηδευμάτων 
~ ς ἢ 
ἐκίνησε. τοσοῦτον γὰρ ἀπέσχον οἱ περίοικοι τὴν 
\ ~ > 
ἀπόλεμον ἡσυχίαν Ῥωμαίων ἀφορμὴν τῆς κατ 
αὐτῶν ἐπιθέσεως ὑπολαβεῖν, ὥστε καὶ εἴ τις αὖ- 
a \ > / / / “Ἢ 
τοῖς πρὸς ἀλλήλους συνέστη πόλεμος διαλλακτῆρας 
΄- \ “ / \ 
ἐποιοῦντο “Ῥωμαίους καὶ ἐπὶ διαιτητῇ Nowa τὰς 
» θ ὃ λύ 506] ~ a. “δὰ > Ἃ 
ἔχθρας διαλύειν ἠξίουν. τοῦτον οὖν οὐκ ἂν 
~ > / 
αἰσχυνθείην ἐγὼ τὸν ἄνδρα τῶν em εὐδαιμονίᾳ 
A - / 
διαβοηθέντων ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις καταριθμεῖν. γένους 
A ” / \ ~ > / 
te yap ἔφυ βασιλείου καὶ μορφῆς ἀπέλαυσε βασι- 
“ \ \ / ΝΜ 
λικῆς παιδείαν τε οὐ τὴν περὶ λόγους ἄχρηστον 


1 γεωργοὺς after ἀργοὺς deleted by Meineke, Biicheler. 
2 πλούτων after ὄντα deleted by Kiessling. 
3 οὖν added by Steph.*. 4 λόγους Steph.: λόγον O. 


538 


BOOK II. 76, 2-4 


record of the lands that were well and ill cultivated 
and laid it before the king, who repaid the diligence 
of the careful husbandmen with commendations and 
favours, and by reprimanding and fining the sloth- 
ful encouraged them to cultivate their lands with 
greater attention. Accordingly, the people, being 
freed from wars and exempt from any attendance 
on the affairs of the State, and at the same time 
being disgraced and punished for idleness and sloth, 
all became husbandmen and looked upon the riches 
which the earth yields and which of all others are 
the most just as more enjoyable than the precarious 
affluence of a military life. And by the same 
means Numa came to be beloved of his subjects, 
the example of his neighbours, and the theme of 
posterity. It was owing to these measures that 
neither civil dissension broke the harmony of the 
State nor foreign war interrupted the observance 
of his most excellent and admirable institutions. 
For their neighbours were so far from looking upon 
the peaceful tranquillity of the Romans as an oppor- 
tunity for attacking them, that, if at any time they 
were at war with one another, they chose the 
Romans for mediators and wished to settle their 
enmities under the arbitration of Numa. This 
man, therefore, I should take no shame in placing 
among the foremost of those who have been celebrated 
for their felicity in life. For he was of royal birth and 
of royal appearance ; and he pursued an education 
which was not the kind of useless training that 
deals only with words,! but a discipline that taught 


1 A thrust at the sophists or rhetoricians. 


539 


DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS 


ἤσκησεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἧς εὐσεβεῖν ἔμαθε καὶ τὰς ἄλλας 
ἐπιτηδεύειν ἀρετάς. ἡγεμονίαν δὲ τὴν “Ρωμαίων 
~ > / 4 Ἃ \ ͵ 3 “- eto 
παραλαβεῖν ἠξιώθη νέος ὧν κατὰ κλέος ἀρετῆς ὑπ 
αὐτῶν ἐπίκλητος ἀχθεὶς καὶ διετέλεσε πειθομένοις 
ἅπαντα τὸν βίον τοῖς ἀρχομένοις χρώμενος - ἡλικίας 
> > \ / 4 ¢ / > \ e \ ~ 
δ᾽ ἐπὶ μήκιστον ἤλασεν ὁλόκληρος οὐδὲν ὑπὸ τῆς 
τύχης κακωθεὶς καὶ θανάτων τὸν ῥᾷστον ἐτελεύ- 
τησεν ὑπὸ γήρως μαρανθείς, ὁμοίου παραμείναντος 
~ ~ > ~ 
αὐτῷ τοῦ συγκληρωθέντος ἐξ ἀρχῆς δαίμονος ἕως 
> > ,ὔ » ,ὔ / \ ς \ > 7 
ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἠφανίσθη, βιώσας μὲν ὑπὲρ ὀγδοή- 
κοντα ἔτη, βασιλεύσας δὲ τρία καὶ τετταράκοντα, 
« 
γενεὰν δὲ καταλιπών, ὡς μὲν ot πλείους γράφουσιν, 
-ν 
υἱοὺς τέτταρας καὶ θυγατέρα μίαν, ὧν ἔτι σώζεται 
A / ¢e \ / - ε A ͵ὕ 
τὰ γένη, ὡς δὲ Γέλλιος I'vaios ἱστορεῖ, θυγατέρα 
/ > e > / "A / ¢ / 2,. 2 
μόνην, ἐξ As ἐγένετο “Ayxos Μάρκιος 6 τρίτος am 
e 
ἐκείνου γενόμενος “Ῥωμαίων βασιλεύς. τελευτή- 
σαντι δ᾽ αὐτῷ πένθος μέγα προὔθετο ἡ πόλις καὶ 
ταφὰς ἐποιήσατο λαμπροτάτας. κεῖται δ᾽ ἐν 
᾿Ιανίκλῳ πέραν τοῦ Τεβέριος ποταμοῦ. καὶ τὰ 
\ \ λί Νό ~ Ad 
μὲν περὶ Πομπιλίου Nowa τοσαῦτα παρελάβομεν. 


540 


BOOK II. 76, 4-6 


him to practise piety and every other virtue. When 
he was young he was thought worthy to assume the 
sovereignty over the Romans, who had invited him 
to that dignity upon the reputation of his virtue; 
and he continued to command the obedience of 
his subjects during his whole life. He lived to a 
very advanced age without any impairment of 
his faculties and without suffering any blow at 
Fortune’s hands; and he died the easiest of all 
deaths, being withered by age, the genius who had 
been allotted to him from his birth having continued 
the same favour to him till he disappeared from 
among men. He lived more than eighty years and 
reigned forty-three, leaving behind him, according to 
most historians, four sons and one daughter, whose 
posterity remain to this day; but according to 
Gnaeus Gellius he left only one daughter, who was 
the mother of Ancus Marcius, the second! king 
of the Romans after him. His death was greatly 
lamented by the state, which gave him a most 
splendid funeral. He lies buried upon the Janiculum, 
on the other side of the river Tiber. Such is the ac- 
count we have received concerning Numa Pompilius. 


1 Literally, ‘‘ the third,’’ counting inclusively. 


241 


a saw 


IL 





> 
τὰν 
i ᾿ 
᾿Ὶ 
΄ 
Στ 
΄ ΨΥ 
~teAe γε. Φ. 
~~ « ws 
Ove. 
᾿ Snel , 
~ i . 
ie 
‘ * 
᾿ 
ΟΣ 
me 
ΓΈ 


irk οὐ soil 
ay 4 ᾿ 






19997 oved ow 
a 


ῃ ΓΝ 


«ΝΣ 


INDEX 


ABORIGINES, origin of, 31-43, 307, 
415; cities of, 43-49, 51-55, 61, 
449, 451, 457, cf. 65 f.; unite 
with Pelasgians, 55, 61-67, 69, 75, 
83, 315, 451; early dwellers on 
site of Rome, 29, 99, 109, 125, 129, 
307, 313f.; underrule of Faunus, 
101, 139, 141,143; under Latinus, 
143, 189 f., 195-201, 209, 239, 241: 
called Latins, 31, 201. 

Acallaris, ancestress of Aeneas, 207. 

Acarnanians, 165, 169 and notes. 

Achaeans, take Troy, 145-51, 157, 
173, 193, 209, 229, 237, 505. 

— a nation in the Peloponnesus, 
83; cf. 309. 

—— a tribe on the eastern shore of 
the Euxine, 309. 

Achaeus, son of Poseidon, 57. 

Achaia, in the Peloponnesus, 35, 83. 

— in Thessaly, 57. 

Achilles, 157, 173. 

Acté, peninsula of Chalcidicé, 81. 

Actium, 165. 

Adriatic sea, 9, 453. 

pa oe (Segesta), city in Sicily, 


Aegestus, a Trojan, 151, 171-75. 
— a priest at Lavinium, 221. 
— son of Numitor, 253. 

Aelii, the, 25 and n. 2. 

Aemilia, a Vestal, 511. 

Aeneas, ancestry of, 207, cf. 201 f. ; 
at fall of Troy, 147-51, 157; leads 
Trojans to Italy, 143 f., 153-201, 
Sef, ΤῚΣ 000, 6]. 2197 237, 
241 f.; death of, 211 f.; shrines 
and monuments to, 167, 175, 179 
f., 213. 

—— (different from _ preceding), 
leads Trojans to Italy, 177. 

— son of Silvius, Alban king, 233. 

rey Boa in "Thrace, 161 f., 


— town in Latium, 243. 


Aeneias, cult-title of Aphrodité, 
165, 175 5. 

Aequicoli, Italian tribe, 521. 

eb tragic poet (525-456), 
1 

Aetolians, 57, 169. 


Aezeians, earlier name of Oenotrians, 
7 


Sha 
sone early king in Peloponnesus, 
5.5 

Agathocles, tyrant of Syracuse, 239. 

Agathyllus, Arcadian poet, 159, 237. 

Agylla, earlier name of Caere, 65. 

Alba, Alban king, 233. 

Alba Longa, 145, 217 f., 243, 275, 
277, 295, 297. 

Alban district, 119, 219. 

Albans, found Rome, 235, 243, 315; 
found other cities, 417, 457, 465; 
other allusions to, 253, 255, 317, 
419, cf. 489. 

Albula, old name for the Tiber, 233. 

Alcmena, mother of Hercules, 131. 

Alcyoné, priestess at Argos, 71. 

Alexander (Paris), 157. 

—— the Great, 9, 163. 

—— father of Dionysius, 27. 

Alimentus, L. Cincius (fl. ca. 210), 
ona annalist, 21, 245, 263, 

423 


Allodius, Alban king, 233. 

Alpheus. river in Peloponnesus, 111. 

Alps, 31, 137. 

Alsium, ancient city on coast of 
Etruria, 67. 

Aluntium, town in Sicily, 169. 

Amata, wife of Latinus, 211. 

Ambracia, 165 f. 

Ambracian gulf, 165 

Ambrax, king of Ambracia, 165. 

Amiternum, old Sabine town, 49, 
451. 

Amulius, Alban king, 235, 253-63, 
277-87, 289-93. 

Amyntor, grandson of Pelasgus, 91 


543 


INDEX 


Anactorium, city in Acarnania, 169. 
Anaximenes, historian (fourth cent.), 


Anchisa, town in Italy, 243. 

Anchises, father of Aeneas, 141, 155, 
167, 177, (207, 213, 243; 317; 
cf. 149, 153. 

— Harbour of, in Epirus, 167. 

Ancus Marcius. See Marcius. 

Anius, king of Delos, 163, 197. 

Antemnae, town in Latium, 55, 405, 
415. 

Antemnates, inhabitants of Antem 
nae, 407, 411-135. 

Anthemoné, wife of Aeneas, 159. 

Anteias, founder of Antium, 241. 

Antenoridae, treachery of, 147. 

Antias, Valerius, historian (early 
first cent.), 25, 349. 

Antigonus, historian 
known), 19. 

Antiochus of Syracuse, historian 
(late fifth cent.), 39, 73, 113 f., 
243 f. 

Antium, town in Latium, 241, 

Apennine mountains, 29, "43. 

Aphrodité, 155, 161- ΟἹ, 177, 207, 
317": surnamed Aeneias, 165, 175. 


(date un- 


rt bel be 


Apollo, 75, 489; ef. 61, 63. 
Arcadia, original home (a) of 
Oenotrians, 35, 41, 313 f., 415; 


(b) of Evander and his company, 
99, 315; (c) of Trojans, 201-05; 
Aeneias in, 159, 179. 

Arcadians, in the Peloponnesus, 35, 
43, 83, 163; in Italy with 
fvander, 99-109, 129-33, 139, 
143, 145, 267, 289, 307, 315 i 

Arctinus, epic poet, 225, 227. 

Ardea, ‘town in Latium, 521; 
εἴ. 2AS Te 1. 

Ardeias, founder of Ardea, 241. 

Argos, 55, 67, 71, 83, 125, 135, 141; 
cf. 307. 

Ariaethus (or Araethus), Arcadian 
historian (?), 159. 

Aristotle, philosopher (fourth cent.), 
237 1. 

Artemis, 373. 

Ascanian lake, in Asia Minor, 153. 

Ascanius, son of Aeneas, 153, 177 εξ: 
913-17, 220 (Ὁ 237, 241, 329, 
495 ; cf. 149. 

Asia, 7, 57, 85, 89, 203 f., 225. 

Asies, brother of Atys, 87. 


044 


Assaracus, son of Tros, 207. 

AssyTians, 7. 

Athena, 107, 225 f. 

Athenians, 9, 207, 335, 339, 359. 

Athens, 83, 93, 235, 247 f., 251. 

a "Ey king of Arcadia, 163, 

Althides, histories of Attica, 27; 
ef. 205, n. 1. 

Attica, 27, 205. 

Atys, Lydian king, 87, 89. 

Augustus Caesar, 23, 231, n. 1. 

Auronissi (error for Aurunci ?), tribe 
in Campania, 67. 

Aurunci, 67 and note. 

Ausonia, Greek name for Italy, 115. 

Ausonian sea, 37 

Ausonians, 71, 93. 

Aventine hill, 103, 235, 271, 289, 
297, 419. 

Aventinus Alban king, 235. 


BABYLONIA, 117 

Bateia, wife of Dardanus, 163, 207. 

Batia, town of the Aborigines, 47. 

Bebrycia, district on the Hellespont, 
179. 

Boeotia, 57. 

Bruttians, 307. 

Brutus, L. Junius (cos. 507), 247. 

Buthrotum, town in Epirus, 167. 


CABEIRI, divinities worshipped in 
Samothrace and neighbouring 
regions, 77. 

Cacus, a robber, 127 f., 137 £. 

Caelian hill, 417, 455. 

Caelius, an Etruscan, 417. 

Caelus (Uranus), 363. 

Caenina, town in Latium, 273 .405, 
415. 

Caeninenses, inhabitants of Caenina, 
407, 411- 15. 

Caere, city in Etruria, 65. 

Caesar, Augustus, 23, 231, n. 1. 

Julius, 231, n. 1. 

Caieta, Italian promontory, 175. 

Callias of Syracuse, historian (fl. ca. 
300), 239. 

Callirrhoé, daughter of Oceanus, 85. 

daughter of Scamander, 207. 

Callistratus, Domitius, historian 
(date uncertain), 225. 

Callithea, mother οἱ Tyrrhenus, 87, 








INDEX 


Calpetus, Alban king, 233. 
Calpurnii, the 25 and note. 
Cameria, town in Latium, 457. 
Camerini, 457, 465. 

Campanian plains, 67, 119. 

Cannae, battle of, 361. 

Capetus, Alban king, 233. 

Caphyae. “a iD 

Capitol, 111, 

Capitoline Eu. ‘tos, 109, 315, 419- 
423, 435, 455. See also Satur- 
nian hill. 

pm op ape: T. Manlius (cos. 389), 

9 


Capua, 243. 
Capyae, town in Arcadia, 159 and 


Ὦν.2. 
ζῶντι father of Anchises, 159, 207, 
2 


43. 
—— Alban king, 233. 
Carinae, place in Rome, 223. 
Carmenta, mother of Evander, 99, 
103 


Carthage, 123, 245, 359. 

Carthaginians, 13, 311, 505. 

Carvilius, Sp., first Roman _ to 
divorce his wife, 385. 

Cassander, king of Macedonia, 163. 

Castrum Minervae, place in Calabria, 
169, n. 5. 

Cato, M. Porcius (cens. 184), states- 
man and historian, 25, 33, 43, 
245, 263, 451. 

Celer, slayer of Remus, 303 ; cf. 349. 

Cephalon of Gergis, fictitious author, 
157 and note, 237. 

Ceraunian mountains, near Reate, 


45. 
Ceres, 107. 
Chaeronea, battle of, 359. 
Chalcidians, minor element in 


population of Acté, 81. 
Charondas, Sicilian lawgiver, 387. 
Charops, Athenian archon, 235, 251. 
Choraeus, grandfather of Tyr- 

rhenus, 87. 
ped ay wife of Dardanus, 203, 207, 


Chiscthion; Laconian promontory, 

. 168. 

Cinaethus, companion of Aeneas, 
63 


163. 
Cincius. See Alimentus. 
Circé, 239 f. 
Circus Maximus, 267, 271, 403, 519. 


Clymené, wife of Prometheus, 57. 
gery daughter of Laomedon, 
το 

Codoné, wife ot Aeneas, 159. 

a L. Tarquinius (cos. 507), 
47. 

Colline gate. See Porta Collina. 

—— hill (error for Quirinal), 515, 


nes; 

Consualia, festival 
Consus, 107, 403. 

Consus, Italic god, 403. 

Coretus, mountain near Reate, 47 

Corinthians, 169. 

Corniculan mountains, in Latium, 
88. 

Corsula, town of the Aborigines, 47. 

Corthonia (Cortona), 85. 

Cotylé, variant of Cutilia, 63. 

Cotys, son of Manes, 87. 

Crassus, M. Licinius, defeated by 
Parthians, 331. 

Cretans, 375; in Italy, 43. 

Crete, 57. 

Crimisus, river in Sicily, 171. 

Crinacus, father of Macar, 59. 

Cronus, 63, 111, 121. 

—— hill of, at Olympia, 111. 

— hill οἵ, at Rome (Capitoline), 
109 f. See also Saturnian hill. 

Croton (Cortona), 65, 83 f., 91. 

—— city in southern Italy, 481 f. 

Crotoniats, inhabitants of Cortona, 
95. 

Crusaeans, Thracian tribes, 155. 161. 

Crustumerians, 415. 

Crustumerium, town 
405, 415, 463, 465. 

Cures, chief city of Sabines, 417, 
449 f., 481. 

sg τ ρόρῃ yearly inhabitants of Aetolia, 


in honour of 


in Latium, 


—— demonic attendants oi Rhea, 
489; rites of, 373, 517-21. 
Curtius, Mettius, Sabine teader, 


431-35, 445. 

Cutilia (Cutiliae), city of the ΑΒ’ 
origines, 49, 61, 451. 

Cybelé], rites of, in Rome, 865 f.; 
ef. 455. 

Cyclades, 57. 

Cyllené, a nymph, 41. 

—— mountain in Arcadia, 41 203. 

Cythera, or off southern point 
of Laconia, 16 


949 


INDEX 


DaAictes, Olympic victor, 235. 
Damastes of Sigeum, genealogist 
and geographer (fl. ca. 400), 237. 

Dardanidae, 317. 

Dardanus, ancestor of Aeneas, 163, 
203 f., 207, 225 f.,° 505. 

city in the Troad, 147, 151, 
201, 205. 

Dascy litis, district on the Propontis, 
152. 

Daunians, 119. 

Deianira, wife of Pelasgus, 35, 41. 

Deimas, son of Dardanus, 203. 

Delians, 197. 

Delos, 163. 

Delphi, 61, 489. 

Demagoras of Samos, writer on 
Trojan or Samothracian anti- 
quities (date unknown), 237. 

Demeter, 39, 205. 

Deucalion, son of Prometheus, 57. 

Dexamenus, son of Herakles, 165. 

Diadochi, the “Successors” of 
Alexander the Great, 9, 163; ef. 
19, n.1. 

Diana, 455. 

Dicté, mountain in Crete, 489. 

Diomed, 227. 

Dionysius of Chalcis, historian 
(fourth cent.), 241. 

— of Halicarnassus, historian 
(late first cent.), 27. 

Dionysus, 365. 

Dioryctus, place on canal near 
Leucas, 165 and note. 

—— city in Epirus, 49, 59, 63, 





ied 91. 
Drepana, town in western Sicily, 171. 


ECHINADES, islands off coast of 
Acarnania, 169. 

Egeria, a nymph, 487 f. 

Egyp t, 9; ΔΕ. 

Eleans, 111, 309 and note. 

Electra, daughter of Atlas, 163, 203. 

Elis, 111, 315 f. 

Elyma, city in Sicily, 173 and note. 

Elymians, a people in Sicily, 71, 
175, 209. 

Elymus, a Trojan, 151, 171- 75. 

-- ΣΉΝ in Sicily, 175 5» ε΄. 


τό τὰκ father of Romus, 241. 


546 


Ennius, Roman poet (239-169), 
191 na: 

Enyalius, 449, 455. 

Epeans, ancient people of Elis, 111, 
139, 201, 315 f. 

Epigoni, sons of the Diadochi, 19 
and note. 

Epirus, 19, 167. 

Eratosthenes, Greek scientific writer 
(third cent.), 247. 

Erichthonius, son of Dardanus, 
163 f., 207. 

Erinyes, 535. 

ταὶ rs island near Spain, 125, 


ipa Sibyl of, 183 and note. 

pee Ete ped and mountain in Sicily, 
17 

Requiline hill 421. 

Etruria and Etruscans. See Tyr- 
rhenia and Tyrrhenians. 

Euboea, 57. 

Eumedes, ancestor of Aeneas, 207. 

Eunomus, nephew of Lycurgus, 453. 

Europe, 7 f., 43, 117, 153, 181, 203. 

Euryleon, earlier name of Ascanius, 
213; or brother of Ascanius, 237. 

Eurystheus, king of Mycenae, 125. 

Euxenus (?), unknown mytho- 
grapher, 111 and note. 

Euxine sea, 11, 309. 

Evander, 99, 103, 129 f., 139, 141, 
201, 267, 273, 289, 307, 315. 


FABIDIUS, Modius, founder of Cures, 
449, 


Fabius Maximus Servilianus, Q. (cos. 
142), author of a work on religious 
antiquities and a history (?), 25 
and n. 1. 

—— Pictor, Q., first Roman annal- 
ist (late second cent.), 21, 245; 
263, 275, 423, 425, 427. 

Faith, Public, divine honours paid 
to, 535 f. 

Falerii, city in Etruria, 67. 

Falernian district, in wortinieont 
corner of Campania, 119° cf. 219. 

Faunus, king of the Aborigines, 101, 
139 f., 143. 

Faustinus, brother of Faustulus, 289, 

Faustulus, foster-father of Romulus 
and Remus, 269, 275 f., 283 f., 
289 f., 301. 


INDEX 


Feronia, goddess, 453. 

— town in Latium, 453. 

Fescennium, city in Etruria, 67. 

Fieulea, town in Latium, 55. 

Fidenae, town in Latium, 463 f., 
467, 469 f. 

Fidenates, 463 f. 

Foronia, earlier spelling of Feronia, 
453 


Forum boarium (cattle market), 
153. 

--- Romanum, 223, 301, 391, 397, 
435, 455, 495, 515 

—— Popilii, place in Campania, 69. 


GABU, town in Latium, 291. 

Gaul, 33. 

Gauls, 123, 247 f., 807. 

Gé, goddess, 85. 

Gellii, the, 25 and note. 

Geryon, cattle of, 115-25, 137. 

Gracchus, C. (trib. 123), 345. 

—— Ti. (trib. 133), 345, n. 1. 

Great Gods (another name for the 
Cabeiri), 165, 225 29, 373. 

Greece, 11, 35, ‘43, 57, 73, 79, 83, 91, 
101, 153, 359. 

Greeks, passim. 


HAEMONIA, earlier name of Thessaly, 
57, 201, 315. 

Halié, ancestress of Tyrrhenus, 87. 

Hannibalic war, 361. 

Hector, descendants of, 153. 

Hegesianax of Alexandria in the 
Troad, historian (fl. ca. 196), 
LoVe Ἐν 3: 

Hegesippus of Mecyberna, historian 
(fourth or third cent.), 157 f. 

Helenus, 167. 

Hellanicus of Lesbos, logographer 
(fifth i as ),7%#1, 01, 115, 155, 287 
and n. 

ones 57, 95, 153, 205, 209. 

Hera, 83. See also Juno. 


Herakles, 89, 165. See also 
Hercules. 

Hercules, 103, 109-15, 123-43, 
201, 307, 315 

—— Pillars of, 11. 


Hermes, 99, 203, 315. 

Herodotus, historian (fifth cent.), 
7, 98. 

Hersilia. leader of the Sabine 
women, 443. 


Hesperia, Greek name for Italy, 
115, 159. 

Hestia (Vesta), 503; see 499, n. 2. 

Hestiaeotis, district in Thessaly, 57. 

neni mother of Anchises, 
207. 


Hieronymus of Cardia, historian 


(ca. 364-ca. 260), 19, 23; cf. 15 
ne 1. 

Hippocrateia, Arcadian festival, 
107. 

Homer, 145, 177, 349. 

Hostilius, Tullus, third king of 


Rome, 219, 251, 377, 515. 


IAPYGIAN promontory, 37 f., 169. 

TIapygians, 71. 

Iasus, brother of Dardanus, 203 f. 

Iberians, 307. 

Ida, mountain in Phrygia, 149 f., 
155, 183, 205. 

Idaean goddess (Cybelé), 365 f. 

Idaeus, son of Dardanus, 203. 

Tlia (Rhea Silvia), 253-263, 269, 
289 


Tlium, 111, 151, 179, 201, 207, 227; 
people of, 147, 505. See also 
Troy. 

Inachus, river of Argos, 83. 

inter duos lucos, place on Capitoline 
hill, 355 and note. 

Ionian gulf, 31, 35f., 41, 59, 91, 167. 

Tonians, 91 ; cf. 83. 

Isagoras, Athenian archon, 249. 

Issa, island near Reate, 47. 

Italians, 71, 519; named after 
Italus, 4 

Italus, early Italian king, 41, 73, 
115, 241, 245. 

Italy. passim ; formerly called Sa- 
turnia, 59, 63, 113 f.; named 
after Italus, 41, 113, or after 
Hercules’ calf (vitulus), 115; its 
manifold attractions, 115-21. 

Tulus, son of Ascanius, 231. 


JANICULUM, the, 541. 

— ancient town, 243. 

τον σον "Roman family, 

Julius, reports ascension of Rom- 
ulus, 495. 

— -- Caesar, ve n. 

Juno, 67, 171; i. Quiritis, 457. 


547 


INDEX 


μων πὲ 75, 115, 129 1., 215, 325, 

363 ; 7: Feretrius, 411; 

; *ridius, 451; J. Inventor, 129 

and note ; J. Stator; 455. 5°8: 

Terminalis, or Terminus, 531. 
See also Zeus. 


LACEDAEMONIANS, 11, 351 f., 359, 
375, 381. 

Lacus Curtius, lake on site of 
Roman Forum, 433 f.; ef. 455. 

Laocoén and his sons, 155. 

Laomedon, king of Troy, 111, 171, 
207. 

Larisa, mother of Pelasgus, 57. 

ancient town in Campania, 69. 

Latinium (?), place on coast of Italy, 

239. 

Latins, 93, 213 f., 248, 301, 503; 
named after Latinus, 31, 143, 
201, 317. 

Latinus, king of the Aborigines, 31, 
141 f., 189-201, 211, 229, 239, 
241, 317. 

— ‘Alban, king, 233. 

Laurentia, wife of Faustulus, 289, 
901. 

Laurentum, town in Latium, 143, 
177, 181, 209. 

Lausus, son of Mezentius, 215 f. 

Lavinia, wife of Evander, 103, 141. 

daughter of Anius, king of 

Delos, 197. 

daughter of Latinus, 197 f., 
211, 229 f. 

Lavinians, 189, 199, 459-63. 
Lavinium, town in Latium, 143, 
197 f., 207 f., 213, 217-23, 459 ἢ. 
Leleges, early inhabitants of Greek 

lands, 33, 57. 











ADT. 
Leucaria, daughter of Latinus, 241. 
Leucas, 165, 169. 
Leucosia, island off Italian coast, 


175. 

Leuctra, battle of, 359. 

Libya, 9, 117. 

Licinius. See Macer. 

Liguria, 39, 137. 

Ligurians, 33, 43, 69-73, 137, 307. 

Liris, river between Latium and 
Campania, 29. 

Lista, mother-city of the Abori- 
gines, 49; cf. 47, π. 2. 


048 


Locrians, 57 

Lucumo, an Etruscan, 419 1., 431, 
435 f. 

Lupa, greet given to Laurentia, 


Lupercal, grotto on Palatine sacred 
to Pan, 103 f., 275. 

Lupercalia, festival in honour of 
Pan, 

Lycaon, father of Deianira, 35; 
father of Pallas, 107. 

son of Pelasgus and Deianira, 
35, 41, 315. 

Lycaonia, old name of Arcadia, 315. 

Lycaonians, earlier name of Oeno- 
trians, 37. 

Lycurgus, Spartan lawgiver, 375, 
453, 489 

Lydia, country in Asia, 87. 

Lydians, 89, 97, 521. 

Lydus, king of Lydia, 87 f. 





MACAR, leader of first Greek colony 
sent to Lesbos, 57. 

Macedonia, 11,13, 359. 

Macedonians, empire of, 15, 163, 
311, 359. 

Macer, C. Licinius (trib. 73), orator 
and annalist, 25, 461. 

Maeonia, old name of Lydia, 85. 

Maeonians, 87 f. 

Malea, Laconian cape, 239. 

Mallius (or Manlius ?), L., 63. 

Mamurius, an artificer, 519. 

Manes, first king of Maeonia, 85 ε- 

Marcius, Ancus, fourth king of 
Rome, 251, 541. 

me 45, 49, 101, 255 f., 317, 449, 


473. 
Marsians, 307. 
Maruvium, city of the Aborigines, 


47. 
Mater Idaea, 365, n. 2; ef. 205. 
Matiene, city of the Aborigines, 47. 
Medes, empire of, 7. 
Medullia, town in Latium, 417. 
Mefula, city of the Aborigines, 45. 
Melas, gulf between Thracian 
Chersonese and mainland, 203. 
Menecrates of Xanthus in Lycia, 
historian (fourth cent. ?), 157. 
Menippé, wife of Pelasgus, 91. 
Messapians, 119. 
Metellus, L. Caecilius (cos. 251), 505. 


INDEX 


Mezentius, king of the Etruscans, 
213-17, 329. 

Minerva, 47; cf. 169. 

Minos, king of Crete, 489. 

Minturnae, town in Latium, 29. 

Misenus, companion of Aeneas, 175. 

Modius Fabidius, founder of Cures, 
449. 

Molossians, a people in Epirus, 237. 

Moon, as goddess, 455. 

Morges, early Italian king, 41, 243 f. 

Morgetes, name given to Oenotrians, 
41 


Mossynoeci, Asiatic people living in 
towers, 85. 

Mother of the Gods (Cybelé), 205, 
365, n. 2. 

Mugonia. See Porta Mugonia. 

Myrsilus of Lesbos, historian (first 
half of third cent.), 77, 91. 

Myscelus, founder of Croton, 483. 


NANAS, descendant of Pelasgus, 91. 
Napetine bay, in southern Italy, 
113. 


Neapolis, 141. 

Nemesis, worshipped, 535. 

Neoptolemus, 149, 153. 

Neptune, 107, 399, 403. 
Poseidon. 

Nero, Ti. Claudius (cos. 7), the later 
emperor Tiberius, 11. 

Nesos, place in Arcadia, 159. 

Niobé, 35, 57. 

Nomentum, city in Sabine country, 
465 


See also 


Numa Pompilius, birth and training 
of, 479-85, 539; chosen king of 
Rome, 479 f., 485; reign of, 485- 
541; cf. 251, 377, 393. 

Numicius, river in Latium, 213. 

Numitor, grandfather of Romulus 
and Remus, 235, 253 f., 259 f., 
271, 273, 277-83, 287, 289-93, 
297 f., 319, 325, 399. 


OcEAN (Atlantic), 11, 135. 

Oceanus, 57, 83, 87. 

Odysseus, 227, 237, 239. 

Oeniadae, people or town in Acar- 
nania, 169. 

Oenotria, name given to region on 
west coast of Italy, 37. 

Oenotrians, ancient race of southern 
Italy, 37-43, 71 f., 307, 415, 


Oenotrus, grandson of Pelasgus, 
35 f., 41, 501, 315. 

Olympus, mountain in Thessaly, 57. 

Omphalé, mother of Tyrrhenus, 89, 

Ophrynium, city in the Troad, 147, 
151. 


Opicans, nation in southern Italy, 
73, 175, 239, 307. 

Orchomenus, city in Arcadia, 159. 

Orvinium, city of the Aborigines, 45. 

Ossa, mountain in Thessaly, 57. 

Ostia, city at mouth of the ‘Tiber, 29. 


PALATINE hill, 101 f., 265-73, 289 f., 
295-301, 307, 315, 417, 455, 503, 
SLD. See also Pallantium. 

Palatium, city of the Aborigines, 45. 

= a corruption of Pallantium, 
Ο1 

Palinurus, Harbour oi, 175. 

Palladium, statue of Pallas Athena, 
part of dowry brought by Chrysé 
to Dardanus, 227, 229, 505; 
ene one of two, 225 Ee εἶ 


Pallantium, city in Arcadia, 101, 
201, 315. 

town. founded by Arcadians 
on Palatine hill, 101 f., 109, 125, 
129, 145, 295, 315. 

Pallas, son of Hercules, 103, 141. 

son of Lycaon, 107. 

—— father of Chrysé, 203, 207, 225. 

Pallené, 153 and note, 159, 161 f. 

Pamphylian sea, 11. 

Pan, 103, 121, 267, 273. 

Paneienett (Quinquatria), 
and ἢ 

Papirius, Ὁ, (cos. 231), 385. 

Parilia, 305. 

Parnassus, 57. 

Parthians, 331. 

ee: of Thyrium, joins Aeneas, 

Pelargikon, ancient wall about the 
Acropolis at Athens, 93 and note. 

Pelasgians, early history of, 55-59, 
91 f.; in Italy, 29, 43, 55, 59- 69, 
73-85, 91-99, 109, 143, 201, 307, 
315.  Siae 451, 

Pelasgiotis, region in Thessaly, 57. 

Pelasgus, son of Zeus and Niobé, 35, 
41, 55f. 

— son of Poseidon, 57. 

—— father of Phrastor, 91. 








515 


949 


INDEX 


Peloponnesians, settle in Italy, 109, 
143 f., 201, 307. 

Peloponnesus, 11, 35, 55 f., 67, 83, 
163; 201 ἔ., 225. 

Penates, 221-25. 

Peneus, father-in-law of Pelasgus, 
91 


Pergamus, citadel] of Troy, 147 
and note. 

Persephoné, 363. 

Persians, 7 f. 

Peucetians, tribe in Apulia, 37, 41. 

Peucetius, brother of Oenotrus, 37, 
41. 

Phanodemus, historian (date un- 
certain), 205. 

Pheneats, Arcadians from Pheneus, 
et 201. 

Pheneus, town in Arcadia, 111, 139. 

Pherecydes of Athens, logographer 
(fifth cent.), 41. 

Philistus of Syracuse, historian (first 
half of fourth cent.), 71. 

Phocis, 57. 

Phoebus, 63. See Apollo. 

Phoroneus, father of Niobé, 35, 57. 

Phrastor, son of Pelasgus, 91. 

Phrygia, 157, 177 f., 205. 

Phrygians, 93, 153, 157, 365 f. 

Phthiotis, district in Thessaly, 57, 


309, n. 1. 

Phthius, brother of Pelasgus, 57. 

Pinarii, Roman family, 131 f. 

Pisa, city in Elis, 111. 

Pisae, city in Etruria, 65. 

Piso, Cn. Calpurnius (cos. 7), 11. 

—— Frugi, L. Calpurnius (cos. 133), 
annalist, 25, n. 2, 263, 423-29. 

Pittacus, one of the seven wise men 
of Greece, 387. 

Placians, inhabitants of Placia, near 
Cyzicus, 95. 

Pleiades, constellation, 203. 

Pluto, 343, n. 1. 

Po, the, 59. 

Polybius of Megalopolis, historian 
(second cent.), 19, 23, 103, 247. 

Pomentine (Pomptine) plain, 453. 

Pompeii, 141. 

Pompo Pompilius, father of Numa, 
481 


Pomponius, M. (cos. 231), 385. 
Porta Carmentalis, 103. 
Collina, 509. 

— Mugonia, 455. 


550 





Porta Trigemina, 103, 129. 

Portus Veneris, in Calabria, 169. 

Poseidon, 57, 177, 403. See also 
Neptune. 

Posidonia (Paestum), 245, 313. 

Potitii, Roman family, 131 f. 

Potitus, L. Valerius (cos. 389), 249. 

Priam, 157, 173. 

Prisci Latini, 145. 

Proca, Alban king, 235. 

Feet island off Italian coast, 

5 


Prometheus, 57, 137. 

Punic wars, 15, 21, 25, 505; ef. 361. 
See also Carthage and Cartha- 
ginians. 

Pyrgion, Athenian archon, 247. 

aE ini king of Epirus, 19; ef. 15, 


n. 1. 

Pythagoras, the philosopher, 481- 
485. 

—— Olympic victor, 481. 

Pythian oracles, 161. 


QUIRINAL hill, 421, 455, 493, 515. 

Quirinus, identified with Enyalius, 
449, 

—— the deified Romulus. 495. 

Quirites, term for Roman citizens 
collectively, 445. 

Quiritis, surname of Juno, 457. 


RASENNA, Etruscan leader from 
whom the nation derived its 
name, 99. 

Reate, city of the Aborigines, 45-49. 

Reatine territory, 43, 449, 451. 

Reatines, 49. 

Remoria, place near Rome, 295 f., 


301. 

Remus, 235, 241 f., 263-303, 317. 
See also Romus. 

Rhea, wife of Cronus, 455. 

— Silvia. See Ilia. 

Rhené, a nymph, 203. 

Roma Quadrata, 501. 

Romans, passim. 

Rome, before the time of Romulus, 
29, 99 f., 109 f., 243 f., 313 f.; 
colonized by Albans led by 
Romulus and Remus, 145, 219, 
235, 243, 293-305, 315-19, 357; 
other traditions concerning its 
founding, 235-43; regarded by 
many Greek historians as an 


INDEX 


Etruscan city, 93; in reality a 
Greek city, 17, 305-11; named 
after (a) Romulus, 31, 145, 319, 
b) Romus, 241, 243 and note, or 
c) Romé, 237, 239 ; extent of its 
dominion, 11, 29, 101, 187. 

Romé, one of the Trojan women 
with Aeneas, 237, 239. 

Romulus, son of Aeneas, 159, 
Zoi, 241 1f.; sen of Tilia, the 
Vestal, 255 f., 261: early life of, 
263-77, 281-93: founds Rome, 
ΒΝ 240, 240" f., 
293-305, 317-23; chosen king, 
325-29; political, religious and 
social institutions of, 329-401, 
411-15, 445 f., 455 f., 499 f., ef. 
459-63; wars of, 403-11, 415- 
445, 457, 463-71; death of, 471- 
477; worshipped under name of 
Quirinus, 495 ; other allusions to, 
249 f., 477, 489 f., 493. 

Romus, founder of Rome in Greek 
traditions, 237 and n. 2, 239 f., 
243, n. 1. 

Rutulians, ancient people of Latium, 
141, 189, 197, 211. 


SABINE women, seized by Roman 
youths, 399-405; effect peace 
between the two peoples, 441 f. 

Sabines, early history of, 451-55, 
cf. 49; make war upon Rome, 

f., 417-41, 515; conclude 
peace, 443 f. 

Sabus, eponymous hero of the 
Sabines, 451. 

Sal(I)entine promontory, in Cala- 
bria, 169. 

Salii, dancing priests, 515-21. 

Samnites, 307 

Samon, son of Hermes, 203. 

Samothrace, 203, 225 and n. 2, 505. 

Samothracians, 225, 229. 

Sancus, een divinity, 451. 

Sardinia, 359 

Saturn, 111 f., 115, 121 f., 363, 455. 
See also Cronus. 

Saturnia, old name for Italy, 59, 
118, 115; ; ε΄. 63. 

—— town founded on Capitoline by 
Peloponnesian followers of Her- 
cules, 145, 295. See also Saturnian 


hill. 
— town in Etruria, 65. 


Saturnian hill (old name for Capito- 
line), settled by VPeloponnesians, 
109, 113, 123, 148, 307, 315. 


Satyrus, mythographer (date un- 
known), 225. 

Scamander, grandfather of Tros, 
207. 


Scamandrius, son of Hector, 153. 
Scylacian bay, in southern Italy, 
113. 


Segesta, city in Sicily, 173, n. 2. 

Sempronius, C. See Tuditanus. 

Septem Aquae, lake in Reatine 
territory, 47. 

Septem Pagi, region surrendered by 
Veientes to Rome, 471. 

Servius Tullius, sixth king of Rome, 


251. 

Sibyl of Erythrae, on Mount Ida, 
183 and n. 2. 

Sibylline oracles, 113. 161, 183. 

Sicania, earlier name for Sicily, 71. 

Sicanians, 69 f., 171. 

Sicels, early inhabitants of Italy, 29, 
41, 51, 55, 63-69, 201, 313, 415; 
migrate to Sicily, 69- 73, 173. 

Sicelus, early Italian king, 41, 71 f., 


Sicilian quarter, in Tibur, 55. 

—— strait, 39, 69, 115, 171. 

Sicily, 39, 69-73, 115, 143, 169, 
171-75, 179, 209, 359, 505. 

Silenus, historian (end of third cent. , 


19. 
Silvia, Rhea. See Ilia. 
Silvius, posthumous son of Aeneas, 


Solon, 387. 
Solonium, ancient town in Latium, 
19 


419. 

mage. Aprats poet (495-406), 39, 

Spain, 109, 135, 141, 359. 

Sparta, 453. 

Sractenel. 359. 

Spina, town at mouth of Po, 61. 

Spinetic mouth of Po, 59, 91. 

Straton, leader of Sicels, 73. 

Suesbola (Suessula ?), city of the 
Aborigines, 45. 

Sun, as a god, 181, 455. 

Suna, city of the Aborigines, 45. 


TALLUS TYRANNIUS, a Sabine, 445. 
Tarentum, 245, 313. 
891) 


INDEX 


Tarpeia, betrays citadel to Sabines 
423-29. 

Tarquinius Collatinus, L. (cos. 507), 
247. 


— Priscus, L., 251. 
— Superbus, L., 251. 
Tartarus, 363. 


Tatius Titus, Sabine leader, 417- 
429, 443-49. 

Telegonus, son of Latinus and 
Romeé, 239. 

Telephus, father of Tyrrhenus, 89. 

Tellenae, town in Latium, 55. 

Terminalia, festival in honour of the 
gods of boundaries, 531. 

Testruna, original home of Sabines, 
451. 

Teucer, early king in the Troad, 
205, 207. 

Teucris, old name for the Troad, 205. 

Teutamides, descendant of Pelasgus, 


Thargelion, Attic month, 207. 

Thaumasius, mountain in Arcadia, 
201. 

Thebans, 11, 359. 

Themis, ‘Arcadian nymph, mother of 
Evander, 99-103, 129, 315. 

goddess, 535. 

Theopompus, historian 
cent.), 3. 

Thessalians, 339. 

Thessalonica, 163. 

Thessaly, 55 f., 201, 307, 315. 

Thrace, 9, 157 £., 161, 203, 209; 
cf. 81, 155. 

Thyoscoi, earlier form of Tusci, 97. 

Tiber, the, 29, 89, 101, 123, 143, 
233, 265, 269, 297, 313, 469, 471, 
513, 541. 

Tiberinus, Alban king, 233. 

Tibur, town in Latium, 55. 

Timaeus of Tauromenium in Sicily, 
historian (ca. 356-ca. 260), 19, 
23, 221, 245; cf. 15n. 

Tiora, city of the Aborigines, 47. 

Torebians, 91. 

Torebus, brother of Lydus, 8 

Torquatus, Manlius (cos. 40), 389, 
re δ, 

—— — son of preceding, 389. 

Tribula (Trebula?), city of the 
Aborigines, 45. 

Trinacria, early name of Sicily, 69. 

Triptolemus, 39. 


592 





(fourth 


Troad, the, 151, 205, 219, 307, 505. 

Trojan cities, 151, 173, 201. 

Trojan war, as date of reference, 
29, 31, 35, 71, 73, 83, 99, 237, 
243, 245, 315. 

Trojan women, burn Aeneas’ ships, 
173, 237; burn ships of their 
Greek captors, 239. 

Trojans, 93; originally Greeks, 201, 
207; in army of Hercules, 111, 
139, 201; with Aeneas, 143-201, 
209-13, 243, 307, 317, cf. 295; 
with Elymus and Aegestus, 151, 
171, 175; with Helenus, 167. 

Tros, ancestor of Aeneas, 207. 

Troy, captured by (a) Hercules, 
111, (δ) Achaeans, 148, 145-151, 
157, 179, 207 f.; other allusions 
to, 153,171 £., -177,-207,,237, 
239; capture of, as date of refer- 
ence, 31, 89, 145, 207 f., 213, 235, 
317. See also Ilium. 

—— hill near Buthrotum, 167. 

—— place near Laurentum, 177. 

Tubero, L. Aelius, historian (first 
cent.), 25, n. 2. 

—— Q. Aelius, jurist and historian 
(first cent.), 25, n. 2, 273. 

Tuccia, a Vestal, 513. 

Tuditanus, C. Sempronius (cos. 129), 
jurist and annalist, 35, 43. 

Tullius, Servius, sixth king of 
Rome, VAs be 

Turnus. See Tyrrhenus. 

ΤΈΡΕΝ Roman name for Tyrrhenians, 


Tyllus, ancestor of Tyrrhenus, 87. 
Tyrannius, Tallus, a Sabine, 445. 
Tyrrhenia (Etruria), 83, 89 "ks 119, 


τε δ sat 29, 31, 39, 143, 175, 
209, 239, 313, 453 ; "of. ‘37. 

Tyrrhenians (Etruscans), (a) iden- 
tical with Pelasgians, 77, 81 f., 
91 f., (b) of Lydian origin, 85-89, 
(c) natives of Italy, 85, 93-97; 
various names for, 85, 97 f.: other 
allusions to, 37, 67, 85, 99, 213-17, 
307, 327, 329, 373, 419, 423. 

Tyrrhenus, son of At ys, 85 f. ; ; or 
son of Herakles as Omphalé, 89; 
or son of Telephus, 89. 

— (Turnus), leader of Rutulians, 


—— (Tyrrhus), a swineherd, 229 f, 


INDEX 


UMBRIANS, 33, 43, 51. 61, 65, 78, 83 
89, 93, 307, 451. 


VALERIUS ANTIAS. See Antias. 
Varro, M. Terentius, antiquarian 
(first cent.), 45, 369, 447, 451. 
Veientes, inhabitants of Veii, 467 
471, 473. 

Veii, city of Etruria, 467. 

Velia, marshy lands in country ΟἹ 
Aborigines, 65. 

place in Rome, 223. 

Venus, Harbour of, in Calabria, 169 

Vesta, 229, 253 f., 455, 499-515. 

Vestals, 229, 253 f., 261 f., 499-515 

Via Curia, in Reatine teritory, 47 
and n. 1. 

— Quintia, in Reatine territory 
45 and n. 3. 

—— Sacra, in Rome, 445, 455. 





Victory, as goddess, 51, 105, 107. 

Vitulia, name given to Italy by 
Hercules, 115. 

Volusus Valerius, a Sabine. 445. 

Vulcan, 455, 467. 


XANTHUS of Lydia, historian (early 
fifth cent.), 89. 

Xenagoras, historian (date un- 
certain), 239. 

Xypeté, Attic deme, 205. 

ZACYNTHIANS, 163 f. 

Zacynthus, island of, 163 f. 

—— son of Dardanus, 163 f, 

Zenodotus of Troezen, historian 
(late second cent. ?), 451. 

Zeus, 35, 57, 63, 85, 107, 163, 203, 
227, 489. See also Jupiter. 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, ABERDEEN 


593 


lta BP 
vial £6 Ose! 


. 
͵ 
ε- Ἣ 
᾿ 
»“ς cr) te 
fa 
At “Ue 
al 
ral 5 





THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY 


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED 
LATIN AUTHORS 


AMMIANUS MARCELLINVS. Translated by J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. 

APpuLEIus: THE GOLDEN Ass (METAMORPHOSES). W. 
Adlington (1566). Revised by S. Gaselee. 

Sr. AuGuUSTINE: Criry or Gop. 7 Vols., Vol. I. 6. H. 
McCracken. Vol. VI. W.C. Greene. 

St. AUGUSTINE, ConFEsstons or. W. Watts (1631). 2 Vols. 

Sr. AuGusTINE, SELEcT LeTrErRS. J. H. Baxter. 

Avsontius. H.G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols. 

ΒΕ. J. E. King. 2 Vols. 

BorEtuivus: TRACTS AND DE CONSOLATIONE PHILOSOPHIAE. 
Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. Rand. 

CAESAR: ALEXANDRINE, AFRICAN AND SPANISH WARS. 
A. G. Way. 

CaEsaR: Civiz Wars. A. 6. Peskett. 

CaESAR: GALLIC War. H. J. Edwards. 

CaTo AND VARRO: DE RE Rustica. H.B. Ash and W. ἢ. 
Hooper. 

Catuutus. F. W. Cornish; Trsuxttus. J. B. Postgate ; 
PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. J. W. Mackail. 

Cetsus: Dre Mepicina. W.G. Spencer. 3 Vols. 

[CicERO}: RHETORICA AD HERENNIUM. H. Caplan. 

Cicero: Brutus AND OratTor. G. L. Hendrickson and 
H. M. Hubbell. 

Cicero : DE Fato; PARADOxA StoicorumM; DE PARTITIONE 
OratoriA. H. Rackham. (With De Oratore, Vol. II.) 

Cicero: De Finisus. H. Rackham. 

Cicero: Der INVENTIONE, ete. H. M. Hubbell. 


1 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


Cic—ERo: Dr NaturA DrEoruUM AND ACADEMICA. H. 
Rackham. 

Cicero: Dre OrFicus. Walter Miller. 

CicErRo: DE OraToRE. E. W. Sutton and H. Rackham. 
2 Vols. 

Cicero: DE REPUBLICA AND De Lzearsus. Clinton W. 
Keyes. 

CicERO: Dr SENEcTUTE, DE ΑΜΊΟΙΤΙΑ, DE DIVINATIONE. 
W. A. Falconer. 

Cicero: In Catimmmvam, Pro MurensA, Pro Suwa, Pro 
Friacco. Louis Εἰ. Lord. 

Cicero: Letters To Atticus. Εἰ. Ο. Winstedt. 3 Vols. 

Cicero: LETTERS TO HIS Frr=ENDs. W. Glynn Williams. 
3 Vols. 

CicERO: Puiureprics. W.C. A. Ker. 

Cic—eRo: Pro Arcuia, Post Reprrum, DE Domo, DE 
HarvsPicum Responsis, Pro Prancio. N. H. Watts. 

CicERO: Pro CaEctna, Pro LEGE Manr14, Pro CLUENTIO, 
Pro Raptrio. H. Grose Hodge. 

CicERO: Pro ΜΊΓΟΝΕ, In Pisonem, Pro Scauro, Pro 
ἘΌΝΤΕΙΟ, Pro Rapirrio Postumo, Pro MARcELLO, PRo 
Licario, Pro RecEe DeiotTaro. N. H. Watts. 

CicERO: Pro QuincTIO, Pro Roscio AMERINO, PRO Roscio 
ComoErDo, Contra Rutitum. J. H. Freese. 

Cicero: Pro Sestio, In Vatrntum. R. Gardner. 

Cicrero: Tuscutan Disputations. J. E. King. 

CicERO: VERRINEORATIONS. L.H.G.Greenwood. 2 Vols. 

CLAUDIAN. M. Platnauer. 2 Vols. 

CoLtuMELLA: Dz RE Rustica, Dr Arsorisus. H.B. Ash, 
E. 5. Forster and E. Heffner. 3 Vols. 

Curtius, Ὁ: History or ALEXANDER. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. 

Fiorvs. E. 5. Forster; and Cornetius Nepos. J.C. Rolfe. 

FRontINvUsS: STRATAGEMS AND AQuEDUucTs. C.E. Bennett 
and M. B. McElwain. 

Fronto: CoRRESPONDENCE. C. R. Haines. 2 Vols. 

Grewurus. J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. 

Horace: OpEs AND Epopzs. C. E. Bennett. 

Horace: ΒΑΤΙΒΕΒ, Episttes, Ars Portica. H. R. 
Fairclough. 

JEROME: SeLEcT Lerrers. Εἰ. A. Wright. 

JUVENAL and Persrus. G. G. Ramsay. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


Livy. B. O. Foster, F. G. Moore, Evan T. Sage and A. Ὁ. 
Schlesinger and R. M. Geer (General Index). 14 Vols. 

Lucan. J.D. Duff. 

Lucretius. W.H. Ὁ. Rouse. 

Martrar. W.C. A. Ker. 2 Vols. 

Mrvor Latin Poets: from Pusiinius Syrvus to Rutinius 
NAMATIANUS, including GRATTIUS, CALPURNIUS SICULUS, 
NEMESIANUS, AVIANUS, with “ Aetna,” ““Phoenix ”’ and 
other poems. J. Wight Duff and Arnold M. Duff. 

Ovip: THe Art or LOVE AND OTHER Poems. J. H. Mozley. 

Ovip: Fastr. Sir James G. Frazer. 

Ovip: HerrormpeEs and AMorEs. Grant Showerman. 

Ovip: MetramorpHoses. F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. 

Ovip: TristrA and Ex Ponto. A. L. Wheeler. 

PretTronius. M. Heseltine; SENECA APOCOLOCYNTOSIS. 
W. H. D. Rouse. 

Pravutus. Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. 

Piiny: Letters. Melmoth’s translation revised by W. M. 
L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. 

Priny: Naturat History. H. Rackham and W. H. ἢ. 
Jones. 10 Vols. Vols. I-V and IX, H. Rackham. Vols. VI 
and VII W. H. S. Jones. 

Propertivus. H. E. Butler. 

Prupentivus. H.J. Thomson. 2 Vols. 

QuINTILIAN. H.E. Butler. 4 Vols. 

REMAINS OF OLD Latin. Εἰ. H. Warmington. 4 Vols. Vol. I. 
(Ennius and Caecilius.) Vol. II. (Livius, Naevius, 
Pacuvius, Accius.) Vol. III. (Lucilius, Laws of XII 
Tables.) Vol. IV. (Archaic Inscriptions.) 

Sattust. J.C. Rolfe. 

ScriPtorRes HisTorR1AE AUGUSTAE. D. Magie. 3 Vols. 

SEnEcA: ApocoLocyntosis. Cf. PETRONIUS. 

SENECA: EpistuLAE Moraes. R. M. Gummere. 3 Vols. 

SenEcA: Morar Essays. J. W. Basore. 3 Vols. 

SrenEcA: TRAGEDIES. F.J. Miller. 2 Vols. 

Srpontus: PoEMS AND LETTERS. W. B. Anderson. 2 Vols. 

Smzrus Itaticus. J. D. Duff. 2 Vols. 

Statius. J.H.Mozley. 2 Vols. 

Suetonius. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. 

Tacitus: Dratoeus. Sir Wm. Peterson; and AGRICOLA 
AND GERMANIA. Maurice Hutton. 


3 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


Tacitus: HistoRtes AND ANNALS. C. H. Moore and J. 
Jackson, 4 Vols. 

TERENCE. John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. 

TERTULLIAN: APOLOGIA AND De Specracuuis. T. R. 
Glover; Mryuctus Fetrx. G. H. Rendall. 

Vaterius Fuaccus. J. H. Mozley. 

Varro: Dr Lineua Latrva. R.G. Kent. 2 Vols. 

VELLEIUsS PATERCULUS and Res GESTAE Divi AUGUSTI. 
F. W. Shipley. 

Viner. H.R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. 

Vitruvius: De ArcHiTtEcTURA. F. Granger 2 Vols. 


GREEK AUTHORS 


AcHILLEs Tatius. S. Gaselee. 

AELIAN: ON THE NATURE OF ANIMALS. 3 Vols. Vols. I. 11. 
and III, A. F. Scholfield. 

AENEAS Tacitus, ASCLEPIODOTUS AND ONASANDER. The 
Illinois Greek Club. 

AESCHINES. C. D. Adams. 

AgscHytus. H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols. 

ALCIPHRON, AELIAN AND PHILOSTRATUS: LETTERS. A. R. 
Benner and F. H. Fobes. 

ApoLtLoporvus. Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols. 

APOLLONIUS RuHoptivus. R. Ὁ. Seaton. 

Tue Apostonic FatHers. Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols. 

ἈΑΡΡΙΑΝ ΒΞ RomMAN History. Horace White. 4 Vols. 

Aratus. Cf. CALLIMACHUS. 

ARISTOPHANES. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. Verse 
trans. 

ARISTOTLE: ART OF RHETORIC. J. H. Freese. 

ARISTOTLE: ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION, EUDEMIAN ETHICs, 
VIRTUES AND Vices. H. Rackham, 

ARISTOTLE: GENERATION OF AnrmALS. A. L. Peck. 

ARISTOTLE: Mrtapuysics. H. Tredennick. 2 Vols. 

ARISTOTLE: MretEorotocica. H. Ὁ. P. Lee. 

ARISTOTLE: Minor Works. W.S. Hett. ‘““On Colours”, “On 
Things Heard’’, ‘‘Physiognomics”, “On Plants”, “On 
Marvellous Things Heard”’, ““Mechanical Problems”, “On 
Indivisible Lines’’, “Situations and Names of Winds”’, 
“On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias’’. 

ARISTOTLE: NICOMACHEAN Etuics. H. Rackham. 


4 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


ARISTOTLE: OrcONOMICA and Maana Moratia. G. C. 
Armstrong. (With Metaphysics, Vol. 11.) 

ARISTOTLE: ON THE HEAVENS. W. K. C. Guthrie. 

ARISTOTLE: ON THE SOUL, Parva NATURALIA, ON BREATH. 
W.S. Hett. 

ARISTOTLE: ORGANON—CATEGORIES, ON INTERPRETA- 
TION, PrioR ANALYTIcs. H. P. Cooke and H. Tredennick. 

ARISTOTLE: ORGANON—POSTERIOR ANALYTICS, TOPICS. 
H. Tredennick and E. 5. Forster. 

ARISTOTLE: ORGANON—ON SOPHISTICAL REFUTATIONS, 
On COMING TO BE AND Passina Away, ON THE Cosmos. 
E. 8. Forster and D. J. Furley. 

ARISTOTLE: Parts oF AnNmaALS. A. L. Peck; ΜΟΤΙΟΝ AND 
PROGRESSION OF ANIMALS. E. S. Forster. 

ARISTOTLE: Puysics. Rev. P. Wicksteed and F. M. 
Cornford. 2 Vols. 

ARISTOTLE: ῬΟΕΤΙΟΒ and Lonernus. W. Hamilton Fyfe; 
DEMETRIUS ON STYLE. W. Rhys Roberts. 

ARISTOTLE: Pouirics. H. Rackham. 

ARISTOTLE: PRoBLEMS. W.S. Hett. 2 Vols. 

ARISTOTLE: RHETORICA AD ALEXANDRUM. H. Rackham. 
(With Problems. Vol. IT.) 

ARRIAN: History oF ALEXANDER AND InpicA. Rev. E. 
lliffe Robson. 2 Vols. 

ATHENAEUS: DEIPNOSOPHISTAE. C. B. Gulick. 7 Vols. 

St. Bast: Lerrers. R. J. Deferrari. 4 Vols, 

CaLLimacHus: Fracments. ©. A. Trypanis. 

CaLLIMACHUS and LycopHRoN. A. W. Mair; ARATUS. 
G. R. Mair. 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. Rev. G. W. Butterworth. 

CottuTHus. Cf. OPPIAN. 

DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Cf. LoNGUS. 

DEMOSTHENES I: OLYNTHIACS, PHILIPPICS AND MINOR 
Orations. I.-XVII. and XX. J. H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES II: DE Corona and DE Fatsa LEGATIONE. 
C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES III: Merrp1as, ANDROTION, ARISTOORATES, 
TIMOCRATES, ARISTOGEITON. J. H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES IV-VI: PRIVATE ORATIONS AND IN 
NEAERAM. A. T. Murray. 

DEMOSTHENES VII: FUNERAL SPEECH, Erotic Essay, 
ExorpDIA AND LETTERS. N. W. and N. J. DeWitt. 


5 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


Dio Casstus: Roman History. E.Cary. 9 Vols. 

Dio Curysostom. J. W. Cohoon and H. Lamar Crosby. 
5 Vols. 

Dioporus Sicutus. 12 Vols. Vols. I.-VI. C. H. Oldfather. 
Vol. VII. C. L. Sherman. Vols. IX. and X. R. M. Geer. 
Vol. XI. F. Walton. 

DiocEeNEs LaErtius. R.D. Hicks. 2 Vols. 

Dionysius OF HALICARNASSUS: ROMAN ANTIQUITIES. 
Spelman’s translation revised by E. Cary. 7 Vols. 

Epictetus. W. A. Oldfather. 2 Vols. 

Evuriripes. A. 5. Way. 4 Vols. Verse trans. 

EvsEBtIus: EccLEsiastTicat History. Kirsopp Lake and 
J. E. L. Oulton. 2 Vols. 

GALEN: ON THE NaturaAt Facutties. A. J. Brock. 

THE GREEK AnTHOLOGY. W.R. Paton. 5 Vols. 

THE GREEK Bucotio Poets (THEOocRITUS, Bion, Moscuvs). 
J. M. Edmonds. 

GREEK ELEGY AND JAMBUS WITH THE ANACREONTEA. 
J. M. Edmonds. 2 Vols. 

GREEK ΜΑΤΗΞΜΑΤΊΟΑΙ, Works. Ivor Thomas. 2 Vols. 

Heropes. Cf. THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS. 

Heropotus. A.D. Godley. 4 Vols. 

HESIOD AND THE Homeric Hymns. H. G. Evelyn White. 

HrerocratTeEs and the FRAGMENTS OF HERACLEITUS. W. H. 
5. Jones and E. T. Withington. 4 Vols. 

Homer: Iniap. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. 

Homer: Opyssrey. <A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. 

Isarus. E. 8S. Forster. 

IsocratEs. George Norlin and LaRue Van Hook. 3 Vols. 

St. JoHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. Rev. 
G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 

Josepuus. H. St. J. Thackeray and Ralph Marcus. 9 Vols. 
Vols. I.-VILI. 

Juyian. Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. 

Lonecus: DapHnis AND Cutor. Thornley’s translation 
revised by J. M. Edmonds; and Partuentvs. 8. Gaselee. 

Luctan. Vols. 1.-V. A.M. Harmon; Vol. VI. K. Kilburn. 
Vol. VII, M. Ὁ. Macleod. 8 Vols. 

LycopHRon. Cf. CALLIMACHUS. 

Lyra Grareca. J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols. 

Lysias. W. R. M. Lamb. 


6 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


Manetuoo. W. G. Waddell: Protemy: TrTRABIBLOS. 
F. E. Robbins. 

Marous Avuretius. C. R. Haines. 

MENANDER. F. G. Allinson. 

Mryor Attic Orators. Κα. J. Maidment and J. O. Burtt. 
2 Vols. 

Nonnos: Dronystaca. W.H.D. Rouse. 3 Vols. 

ΟΡΡΙΑΝ, CortuTHus, TRyPHIODORUS. A. W. Mair. 

Papyri. 5 Vols. Non-LITeERARY SELECTIONS. A. 8. Hunt 
and C. C. Edgar. 2 Vols. LirErary SeLrections Vol. I. 
(Poetry). D. L. Page. 

PaRTHENIUS. Of. LONGUS. 

PavusANIvus: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. W.H.S. Jones. 5 
Vols. and Companion Vol. arranged by R. E. Wycherley. 

Puito. 10 Vols. Vols. I.-V. F. H. Colson and Rev. G. H. 
Whitaker; Vols. ΙΧ. F. H. Colson. 

Puino. 2supplementary Vols. (Translation only.) Vols. I. 
and II. R. Marcus. 

PHILOSTRATUS: THE Lire oF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA. 
F.C. Coneybeare. 2 Vols. 

PHILOSTRATUS: IMAGINES; CALLISTRATUS: DESCRIPTIONS. 
A. Fairbanks. 

PHILOSTRATUS and Eunapius: LIvEs OF THE SOPHISTS. 
Wilmer Cave Wright. 

Pinpar. Sir J. E. Sandys. 

Piato: CHARMIDES, ALCIBIADES, HripparcHus, THE 
Lovers, THEAGES, Minos and Errnomtis. W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLatTo: CRATYLUS, PARMENIDES, GREATER HIPPIAS, 
LEesseR Hrppras. H.N. Fowler. 

Prato: ΕἸὔΤΗΥΡΗΒΟ, Arpotogy, Crito, PHAEDO, PHAED- 
rus. H.N. Fowler. 

Prato: Lacues, Protracoras, MENo, EvUTHYDEMUS. 
W. R. M. Lamb. 

Puato: Laws. Rev. R. G. Bury. 2 Vels. 

Prato: Lysis, Symposrtum, Goraras. W.R. M. Lamb. 

Prato: ΒΈΡΟΒΙΙΟ. Paul Shorey. 2 Vols. 

Piato: STATESMAN, Pamesus. H. N. Fowler; Ion. 
W. R. M. Lamb. 

Puato: THEAETETUS AND Sopuist. H. WN. Fowler. 

Priato: Timaerus, Critias, CLIropHO, MENEXENUS, EPIs- 
TULAE. Rev. R. G, Bury. 

7 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


PiurarcH: Moratia. 14 Vols. Vols. 1.-V. F. C. Babbitt; 
Vol. VI. W. C. Helmbold; Vol. VII. P. H. De Lacy and 
B. Einarson; Vol. IX. ἘΣ. L. Minar, Jr., F. H. Sandbach, 
W.C. Helmbold; Vol. X. H. N. Fowler; Vol. XII. H. 
Cherniss and W. C. Helmbold. 

PiuTarcH: THE PARALLEL Lives. B. Perrin. 11 Vols. 

Potysius. W.R. Paton. 6 Vols. 

Procopius: History or THE Wars. H.B.Dewing. 7 Vols. 

PToLEMyY: TETRABIBLOS. Cf. MANETHO. 

Quintus SMyRNAEuS. A. 5. Way. Verse trans. 

Sextus Emprricus. Rev. R. G. Bury. 4 Vols. 

SopHoctes. Ε΄. Storr. 2 Vols. Verse trans. 

Straspo: Geography. Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols, 

THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS. J. M. Edmonds. HERODEs, 
ete. A. D. Knox. 

THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO Piants. Sir Arthur Hort. 
2 Vols. 

Tuucypipes. C.F. Smith. 4 Vols. 

TrypHioporus. Cf. OPPIAN. 

XENOPHON: CYROPAEDIA. Walter Millai. 2 Vols. 

XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, and Sym- 
posium. C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd. 3 Vols. 

XENOPHON: MEMORABILIA and QOgrconomicus. Εἰ. Ὁ. 
Marchant. 

XENOPHON: Scripta Minors. EE, C. Marchant. 





VOLUMES IN PREPARATION 


GREEK AUTHORS 


ARISTOTLE: History or AnimALS. A. L. Peck. 
Piotinus. A. H. Armstrong. 


LATIN AUTHORS 





St. AUGUSTINE: CiTY oF GoD. 
BABRIUS AND PHAEDRUS. Β. E. Perry. 


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION 
Ξ---------------------------------------- 
LONDON WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD. 
CAMBRIDGE, MASS. HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 


8 





=i 
= Sx. 


_ 









cane ὄρ νὶ, σόν.“ ὦ» 


Bal 
i} » 

4 

ἡ ὁ 


i 


= 











PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


iia 


i 


retest 


See 
ee 


ἘΣ ΞΡ ΎΣΤΗ 


> 


UMC Ueatiea! 


ἜΠΗ ΜΗΝΗΙ 





